The mitogen-activated protein kinase network, wired
to dynamically function at multiple scales
Paolo Armando Gagliardi and Olivier Pertz
Abstract
The mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK)/extracellular
signal-regulated kinase (ERK) signaling network is a key
transducer of signals from various receptors, including recep-
tor tyrosine kinases (RTKs). It controls cell-cycle entry, sur-
vival, motility, differentiation, as well as other fates. After four
decades of studying this pathway with biochemical methods,
the use of fluorescent biosensors has revealed dynamic be-
haviors such as ERK pulsing, oscillations, and amplitude-
modulated activity. Different RTKs equip the MAPK network
with specific feedback mechanisms to encode these different
ERK dynamics, which are then subsequently decoded into
cytoskeletal events and transcriptional programs, actuating
cellular fates. Recently, collective ERK wave behaviors have
been observed in multiple systems to coordinate cytoskeletal
dynamics with fate decisions within cell collectives. This em-
phasizes that a correct understanding of this pathway requires
studying it at multiple scales.
Addresses
Institute of Cell Biology, University of Bern, Baltzerstrasse 4, 3012
Bern, Switzerland
Corresponding author: Pertz, Olivier (olivier.pertz@unibe.ch)
Current Opinion in Cell Biology2024, 88:102368
This review comes from a themed issue onCell Architecture 2024
Edited byOhad Medaliaand Carsten Janke
For complete overview of the section, please refer the article collection -
Cell Architecture 2024
Available online 15 May 2024
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ceb.2024.102368
0955-0674/© 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an
open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.
org/licenses/by/4.0/).
Introduction
The mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK)/extra-
cellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) pathway serves as
a major transducer of signals from receptor tyrosine ki-
nases (RTKs) and other plasma-membrane receptors,
including G-protein-coupled receptors and integrins.
RTKs’ activation turns on the small GTPase Ras, which
subsequently initiates a signaling cascade involving
rapidly accelerated ﬁbrosarcoma (RAF), mitogen-
activated protein kinase kinase (MEK), and ERK ki-
nases (Figure 1a). Upon activation, ERK phosphorylates
multiple cytosolic substrates and a portion of ERK
translocates to the nucleus, where it phosphorylates
nuclear substrates, thereby inducing broad transcrip-
tional programs. The MAPK network has been the
subject of intense biochemical research for four decades.
Western blots with phospho-ERK antibodies have typi-
cally measured steady-state cell population eaveraged
outputs of ERK activity, providing the intuition that
ERK is either in an ON or OFF state. Early studies
however have suggested that ERK activity dynamics
[1,2] (from now on referred to as ERK dynamics), rather
than steady states control fate decisions, providing an
explanation on how one signaling pathway controls a
large number of fates. The advent of ﬂuorescent bio-
sensors to measure single-cell ERK activity in the past
decade, reviewed in Ref. [3], clearly shows that ERK
dynamics are crucial for cell-fate decision-making.
Importantly, the heterogeneity of single-cell ERK dy-
namics means that population-average measurements
can be highly misleading. Here, we review recent de-
velopments into our understanding of how the MAPK
network can produce a wide variety of single-cell ERK
dynamics. Furthermore, we report on the recent ﬁndings
that, thanks to mechanochemical feedback loops,
multicellular ERK wave patterns can emerge and allow
for coordination of cytoskeletal dynamics and fate de-
cisions. This emphasizes that a correct understanding of
the MAPK network requires its measurement and
manipulation at adequate length and time scales.
MAPK network wiring with distinct
topologies encode different ERK dynamics
Live imaging of ﬂuorescent biosensors has revealed a
rich repertoire of transient [ 4], sustained [ 4,5], pulsatile
[6], oscillatory ERK dynamics [ 7,8] that ﬂuctuate on
minute timescales ( Figure 1 a). In the classic PC12
model system, epidermal growth factor (EGF) and
nerve growth factor (NGF), respectively, trigger tran-
sient and sustained ERK activity [2,4]. Fibroblast
growth factor (FGF) induces another behavior consist-
ing of sustained ERK dynamics of different amplitudes,
depending on the FGF concentration [5]. Thus, three
growth factors (GFs) evoke different ERK dynamics in
PC12 cells in a GF concentrationedependent manner.
In epithelial systems, EGF triggers population
Available online atwww.sciencedirect.com
ScienceDirect
www.sciencedirect.com Current Opinion in Cell Biology2024, 88:102368
heterogeneous nonperiodic 20- to 30-min-long ERK
pulses [ 6,9]. Similar behavior is observed in other
in vitro and in vivosystems [10e12]. Here, the system is
excitable, and the EGF concentration encodes the ERK
pulse frequency, which in turn controls the efﬁciency of
cell-cycle entry [6]. In epithelial cells, the repertoire of
pulsatile ERK dynamics is even greater, when cells are
stimulated with GFs that bind to different ErbB re-
ceptors [13]. Here, the heterogeneity of ERK dynamics
complicates the identiﬁcation of the temporal patterns
associated with each speciﬁc stimulation. However, a
data-driven machine-learning approach can extract
prototypical patterns in the single-cell ERK dynamics
timeseries to provide better intuition about GFs speci-
ﬁcity [13]. Another type of ERK dynamics consists in
periodic oscillations [ 7,8,14e16]. A comprehensive
review that describes how single-cell ERK dynamics
patterns emerge can be found here [ 17].
This rich set of ERK dynamics patterns emerge through
the wiring of the MAPK network with feedback struc-
tures (Figure 1 a). The RAF-MEK-ERK cascade struc-
ture converts graded GF input concentrations into
switch-like, all-or-nothing ERK responses [18].
Furthermore, negative- and positive-feedback loops
from ERK to RAF lead to oscillatory behavior [19], and
EGF-dependent transient or NGF-dependent sustained
ERK dynamics in PC12 cells [ 2,4]. Competition of FGF
binding to its main receptor (FGFR) and coreceptor
(heparan sulfate proteoglycan), when coupled to an
Figure 1
The MAPK pathway produces single-cell and collective dynamics.
(a) The MAPK pathway is equipped with multiple positive- and negative-feedback loops: (1) ERK-RAF negative-feedback loop [2,4]; (2) ERK-RSK-SOS
negative-feedback loop [46]; (3) ERK-RAF positive-feedback loop [2]; (4) modulation of the ERK-RAF negative-feedback loop by EGF stimulation [4]; (5)
modulation of the ERK-RAF positive-feedback loop by NGF stimulation [4]. The different wiring of each receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) allows the MAPK
pathway to differentiate among multiple inputs by producing different temporal dynamics. Cells then are capable to decode these different ERK dynamics
into specific cellular responses and cell-fate decisions. (b) The ability of ERK dynamics to be propagated from cell to cell produces signaling waves of
different shapes and sizes. These ERK activity waves coordinate different self-organization processes at the tissue level. Examples are epithelial ho-
meostasis, wound repair, and fish-scale regeneration. (c) A mechanochemical feedback loop allows the ERK wave to propagate during wound repair.
ERK activity leads to activation of myosin contraction that, in turn, leads to stretching of the adjacent cells, causing ERK activation.
Abbreviations: EGF = epidermal growth factor; ERK = extracellular signal-regulated kinase; RAF = rapidly accelerated fibrosarcoma; NGF = nerve growth
factor; MAPK = mitogen-activated protein kinase.
2 Cell Architecture 2024
Current Opinion in Cell Biology2024, 88:102368 www.sciencedirect.com
MAPK network with weak negative feedback, converts
different FGF concentrations into sustained ERK ac-
tivity of different amplitudes in PC12 cells. Thus, EGF ,
NGF , and FGF can each lead to distinct ERK dynamics
by wiring the MAPK network in different ways. A
powerful approach to dissect these different circuitries
is to dynamically perturb the MAPK network by appli-
cation of growth factor pulses using microﬂuidics and to
record resulting ERK dynamics [ 4,5]. This approach
probes the network at relevant timescales revealing
possible feed-forward network circuitries modulating
negative- and positive-feedback loops in the PC12 cell
system [4]. This was also instrumental to understand
how receptor interactions in the FGFR system can
produce amplitude-modulated sustained ERK activity
in response to different FGF concentrations [5].
Importantly, dynamic application of GF inputs can lead
to synthetic ERK dynamics that reprogram fate inde-
pendently of GF identity [4,5].
This approach was pushed further by building a genetic
circuit comprised of an optogenetic FGFR coupled to a
spectrally compatible ERK biosensor [8]. This circuit
can probe how light-evoked dynamic RTK inputs are
interpreted into ERK dynamics at scale, allowing the
authors to perform a RNAi screen against 50 nodes of
the MAPK network. Surprisingly, knockdown of most of
the nodes does not lead to altered ERK dynamics,
suggesting that the MAPK network is robust against
perturbations. This robustness emerges at least in part
from two simultaneously functioning negative-feedback
loops: the classic ERK-RAF feedback loop, and a feed-
back loop from the ERK substrate p90RSK to SOS
(Figure 1 a). Inhibition of the latter breaks network
robustness and sensitizes the MAPK network to addi-
tional drugs. This exempliﬁes how studying signaling
networks dynamics can provide nonintuitive insights
about their properties and provide opportunities for
directly targeting their robustness. T ogether, these
works illustrate how the tripartite MAPK network, when
coupled with different RTK-dependent feedback
structures, can elicit a rich set of ERK dynamics. The
latter are then subsequently decoded into transcrip-
tional programs that actuate the fate decisions. We refer
to a recent review that describes this process [20].
ERK activity waves as a dynamic signaling
motif in cell collectives
Recently, a new dimension in MAPK signaling has
emerged by the observation of waves of ERK pulses in
epithelial cells. This collective behavior was ﬁrst noticed
by in vivoimaging of the mouse-ear epithelium, in which
ERK waves occurred spontaneously or in response to
wounds [21]. The dynamic ERK-wave signaling motif
was then observed in a wide variety of in vitro cellular
systems (Figure 1b). In the wound healing of epithelial
Mardin-Darby canine kidney cells, collective ERK waves
originate from the wound edge and propagate toward the
interior. These waves spatiotemporally control myosin
activity pulses that coordinate collective motility
[22e24]. ERK waves can also be triggered by apoptotic
cells in a variety of epithelial cells [ 25] or in the ﬂy pupal
notum [26]( Figure 1b). Here, ERK waves locally induce
a transient survival fate in the cells neighboring the
apoptotic lesion, ensuring that these cells remain alive
until the lesion has been repaired. This mechanism
scales to the intensity of the environmental insults that
induce apoptosis and ultimately contributes to epithelial
homeostasis by maintaining epithelial barrier function.
Apoptosis-triggered waves also regulate enterocyte dif-
ferentiation during tissue patterning in human colon
monolayers [27]. Similar ERK waves can also provide the
forces for extrusion of oncogenic cells from an epithelium
[28]. ERK waves spatially control lumen formation in
developing mammary acini [ 29]. Here, ERK waves
dynamically position two spatial domains of high and low
ERK pulse frequencies that respectively control survival
(high ERK pulse frequency at the acinus periphery) and
apoptosis leading to lumen formation (low ERK pulse
frequency in the inner part of the acinus). In mature
acini, apoptosis-triggered ERK waves then
mediate homeostasis.
ERK waves are also prevalent in in vivo systems. During
ﬁsh-scale regeneration, ERK waves can last multiple
days and involve hundreds of cells [30]( Figure 1b). In
Drosophila, ERK waves control invagination of the
tracheal placode [31]. In the mouse, ERK waves regu-
late collective motility-controlling cochlear duct devel-
opment [ 32]. In Planaria, a biochemical approach
suggests the existence of ultrafast ERK waves that
propagate along longitudinal muscles in response to
wounding [33].
The reports mentioned earlier, which have emerged in
the last 8 years, suggest that ERK waves are a ubiquitous
dynamic signaling motif prevalent throughout animal
life. Surprisingly, ERK waves can function at a wide
variety of time and length scales. ERK waves in the ﬂy
pupal notum only extend one row from the apoptotic
lesion [ 26]. In marked contrast, ERK waves propagate
for about 2 days during ﬁsh-scale regeneration [ 30].
Propagation speed also shows a wide range of values,
from 10
mm/h in the regenerating scale in zebraﬁsh [ 30]
to 1 mm/h ultrafast ERK waves that propagate in lon-
gitudinal muscles during wound response in Planaria
[33]. These differences reﬂect different mechanisms of
propagation that will be discussed in the following.
The processes potentially controlled by ERK waves can
considerably vary in their time scales as well. ERK waves
can control cytoskeletal dynamics that feed in the
regulation of collective motility on timescale of minutes
[23]. In contrast, fate decisions regulated by ERK dy-
namics range from timescales of few tens of minutes,
such as during Drosophila development [34], to
MAPK/ERK signaling dynamics at multiple scalesGagliardi and Pertz 3
www.sciencedirect.com Current Opinion in Cell Biology2024, 88:102368
multiple hours, such as in the regulation of survival and
cell-cycle progression in adult mammalian cells [ 6,25].
We propose that ERK waves allow coordination of col-
lective motility with proliferation and survival fates at
different temporal scales, which might be advantageous
during, for example, wound healing. Such coordination
of multiple functions has been observed in developing
mammary acini, in which the transition from high to low
ERK pulse frequencies allows a shift from rapid motility
and proliferation to slower motility and quiescence [ 29].
Mechanisms of ERK wave formation
Most of the observed ERK waves are trigger waves that
emerge through mechanochemical feedback, rather than
sensing a gradient of GFs. On the one hand, the MAPK
network exhibits high sensitivity to mechanical stimuli,
such as stretch, shear stress, substrate stiffness, or pro-
trusive activity [35,36]. Conversely, ERK also controls
cell mechanics by regulating myosin contraction through
phosphorylation of myosin light chain [37]. ERK waves in
epithelial wound healing [ 23], apoptosis-mediated ho-
meostasis [25], acinar morphogenesis [ 29], and extrusion
of oncogenic cells [ 28] all seem to involve a conserved
mechanochemical feedback loop. Here, ERK-mediated
activation of myosin contractility in one cell activates
matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) that leads to cleavage
of pro-EGF ligands, then activation of epidermal growth
factor receptor (EGFR) and production of a new ERK
pulse in the adjacent cell. ERK-mediated activation of
myosin contractility in this cell will then stretch the next
cell, leading to a repetitive relay system, producing the
ERK wave [24]( Figure 1c). Additional mechanosensing
mechanisms feeding into the ERK wave are reviewed
here [38]. Different epithelial cell systems display waves
of different magnitudes, most likely reﬂecting different
strengths of the mechanical linkage between cells [25].
This phenomenon can be captured in a mathematical
model in which different biochemical and mechanical
parameter spaces explain how ERK waves of different
sizes can emerge [39]. Knockout of individual EGFR li-
gands only leads to subtle ERK wave defects, suggesting
that ERK waves are propagated through an EGFR ligand
mixture [40]. Further adding to the complexity of this
system, the hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) dreceptor
METdwires the MAPK network to produce sustained
ERK activity and lamellipodial extension in wound-edge
leader cells [41]. Note that crosstalk of mechanochem-
ical feedback loops with the MAPK network does not
only necessarily produce ERK waves but can also link
curvature sensing to control mechanical forces leading to
repetitive patterning during lung branching morpho-
genesis [42].
The long-lasting ERK waves involved in ﬁsh-scale
regeneration take advantage of a different excitable
system in which the negative feedback is provided by
ERK-dependent expression of negative regulators such
as dual speciﬁcity phosphatases (DUSPs), explaining
their slower kinetics [ 30]. Key new insights from these
ﬁndings are that ERK waves can operate at a variety of
time and length scales, which results both from
different MAPK-network feedback structures, and
emergent properties of collective behavior. In epithelial
ERK waves, the ﬁnding of reciprocal coupling of the
MMPs/pro-EGF/EGFR/MAPK system with ERK-
dependent mechanical feedback blurs the classic idea
of causal hierarchy in which the EGFR is the master
regulator of the system, often depicted as feed-forward
signaling network. The ﬁndings that different EGFR
ligands and HGF ﬁne tune different spatial processes in
the epithelial cell collectives provide new insight about
the function of these GFs that was not available using
classic biochemical methods.
Consequence of oncogenic mutations on
single-cell and collective ERK dynamics
The prevalence of oncogenic mutations or aberrant
expression of components of the MAPK network or
pathways that crosstalk with it begs the question on how
dysregulation impacts on single-cell or collective ERK
dynamics. With respect to single-cell responses, over-
expression of EGFR [ 28] or ErbB2 [ 8] receptors aug-
ments ERK pulse frequency in MCF10A cells
(Figure 2 a). This results from an increased RTK input
on the MAPK network with intact feedback loops. The
same effect is observed in response to activation of
pathways that crosstalk with the MAPK pathway, such as
aberrant Wnt activation [43], or a PIK3CA H1047R
mutation that activates PI3K/Akt signaling [ 29]
(Figure 2 a). In both cases, this involves EGFR activa-
tion, explaining the increase in ERK pulse frequency. In
marked contrast, mutations within the core of the
MAPK network lead distinct ERK dynamics by rewiring
feedback loops. BRAF V600E leads to sustained ERK
dynamics due to insensitivity of mutated BRAF to the
ERK-RAF negative-feedback loop [28]( Figure 2 a). In
contrast, KRAS G12V [ 44] leads to wider, noisy ERK
activity pulses most likely because mutated KRAS
strongly activates the RAFeMEKeERK tripartite
structure with an intact negative-feedback loop from
ERK to RAF (Figure 2a).
Aberrant oncogenic signaling can also feed into emer-
gent properties regulating collective ERK dynamics.
Recently, Gagliardi et al. developed ARCOS, a compu-
tational tool for automatic recognition of collective
signaling events, allowing for quantiﬁcation of ERK
waves in response to KRAS G12V and PIK3CA H1047R
mutations. Beyond the cell autonomous effects
described earlier, both mutations increased the size and
frequency of ERK waves in MCF10A cells [44] and do
not necessarily require initiation by apoptotic cells
(Figure 2 b). In the case of the KRAS G12V mutation,
longer-lasting ERK pulses might lead to increased
4 Cell Architecture 2024
Current Opinion in Cell Biology2024, 88:102368 www.sciencedirect.com
myosin contractility, augmenting the MMPs/EGF-
ligands/EGFR/ERK mechanochemical feedback loop.
In the case of PIK3CA H1047R cells, increased
expression of the EGFR-ligand amphiregulin [ 45]p o -
tentiates the excitability of the EGFR receptor. Thus, at
least, part of the aberrant ERK output results from an
emergent property that depends on cell interactions in
the epithelial collective (Figure 2b).
Having access to a system-level view of the different
scales at which MAPK signaling functions informs about
potential nontrivial “weak” nodes that can be pharma-
cologically targeted to best switch-off oncogenic
signaling for each respective mutation. This is not
accessible using the classical population-average
biochemical experimental paradigm. In the case of an
ErbB2 driven system, coinhibition of an ERK-RSK2-
SOS feedback that leads to loss of network robustness
drastically reduces residual single-cell signaling than
when RAF , MEK, or ERK nodes are targeted individually
[8]. In the case of the PIK3CA H1047R mutation that
“hacks” EGFR signaling to increase the size of the col-
lective ERK waves, inhibition of EGFR or MMPs might
be synergistic with PI3K inhibition. Targeting MAPK
network properties or emergent properties feeding into
collective behavior might therefore realize the potential
of personalized cancer medicine using combinatorial
targeted therapy.
Conclusions and future perspectives
Studying ERK dynamics with single-cell resolution has
clearly augmented our understanding of how the MAPK
network is wired to produce different ERK outputs that
control a wide variety of fates, as well as how emergent
properties allow single cells to coordinate different fates
that occur at different timescales in a tissue (e.g.
Figure 2
Oncogenic mutations alter single-cell ERK dynamics and collective ERK waves.
(a) Different oncogenic alterations affect the pulsatile ERK dynamics of mammary epithelial cells. Mutations at the receptor level (EGFR or ErbB2
amplification) or those that feed to EGFR input (PIK3CA H1047R or Wnt) result in increased ERK pulse frequency. BRAF V600E bypasses the ERK-RAF
negative-feedback loop, causing sustained ERK dynamics. KRAS G12V corrupts the dynamics of the pathway but keeps a pulsatile behavior, thanks to
the intact ERK-RAF negative-feedback loop. (b) Oncogenes can also alter emergence of collective ERK activity patterns. While in WT mammary
epithelium ERK waves are typically triggered by apoptosis, we observed the emergence of apoptosis-independent waves in the presence of KRAS G12V
and PIK3CA H1047R mutations. We speculate that KRAS G12V induces more ERK waves via reinforced mechanochemical feedback loop. On the
contrary, the PIK3CA H1047R mutation determines increased release of EGFR ligands, which makes the system more prone to form ERK waves.
Abbreviations: ERK = extracellular signal-regulated kinase; EGFR = epidermal growth factor receptor; WT = wild type.
MAPK/ERK signaling dynamics at multiple scalesGagliardi and Pertz 5
www.sciencedirect.com Current Opinion in Cell Biology2024, 88:102368
motility versus proliferation and survival). We anticipate
that evolving technologies to measure and manipulate
the MAPK network at relevant time and length scales in
cells, organoids, and tissues will allow us to further
characterize the rich set of dynamic behaviors we have
observed so far. Having access to this knowledge will
allow us to target new nontrivial properties of the MAPK
network to realize the potential of personalized
medicine in cancer and other pathologies such
as Rasopathies.
Funding
This work was supported by Swiss National Science
Foundation grants 310030_185376 and 310030_215581
to O. Pertz.
CRedit authorship contribution statement
Gagliardi PA: Writing dOriginal Draft, Writing dReview
and Editing, Visualization; Pertz O: Writing dOriginal
Draft, Writing dReview and Editing, Fund-
ing acquisition.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing
ﬁnancial interests or personal relationships that could
have appeared to inﬂuence the work reported in
this paper.
Data availability
No data was used for the research described in
the article.
Acknowledgement
We thank Dr. Maciej Dobrzy /C19nski for critically reading the manuscript. We
apologize to all the colleagues that we could not cite and that made sig-
niﬁcant contribution in understanding single-cell extracellular signal-
regulated kinase signaling dynamics.
References
Papers of particular interest, published within the period of review,
have been highlighted as:
* of special interest
* * of outstanding interest
1. Marshall CJ:Specificity of receptor tyrosine kinase signaling:
transient versus sustained extracellular signal-regulated
kinase activation. Cell 1995, 80:179– 185.
2. Santos SDM, Verveer PJ, Bastiaens PIH:Growth factor-
induced MAPK network topology shapes Erk response
determining PC-12 cell fate. Nat Cell Biol2007, 9:324– 330.
3. Nakamura A, Goto Y, Kondo Y, Aoki K:Shedding light on
developmental ERK signaling with genetically encoded bio-
sensors. Dev Camb Engl2021, 148, dev199767.
4. Ryu H, Chung M, Dobrzy/C19nski M, Fey D, Blum Y, Lee SS, Peter M,
Kholodenko BN, Jeon NL, Pertz O:Frequency modulation of
ERK activation dynamics rewires cell fate. Mol Syst Biol2015,
11:838.
5. Blum Y, Mikelson J, Dobrzy/C19nski M, Ryu H, Jacques M, Jeon NL,
Khammash M, Pertz O:Temporal perturbation of ERK dy-
namics reveals network architecture of FGF2/MAPK
signaling. Mol Syst Biol2019, 15, e8947.
6. Albeck JG, Mills GB, Brugge JS:Frequency-modulated pulses
of ERK activity transmit quantitative proliferation signals. Mol
Cell 2013, 49:249– 261.
7
**
. Raina D, Fabris F, Morelli LG, Schröter C:Intermittent ERK
oscillations downstream of FGF in mouse embryonic stem
cells. Development 2022, 149, dev199710.
Here, the authors identify single-cell intermittent ERK activity oscillations
in mouse embryonic stem cells. This suggests that in this cell type, ERK
dynamics is at the interface between pulsatile and oscillatory behavior.
8
**
. Dessauges C, Mikelson J, Dobrzy/C19nski M, Jacques M,
Frismantiene A, Gagliardi PA, Khammash M, Pertz O:Opto-
genetic actuator–ERK biosensor circuits identify MAPK
network nodes that shape ERK dynamics. Mol Syst Biol2022,
18.
This paper combines optoGFR, an optogenetic actuator for MAPK
pathway, with an ERK biosensor to explore the nodes in the MAPK
network that are important for single-cell ERK signaling dynamics. It
shows that the ERK substrate p90RSK2 constitutes a crucial feedback
loop that is necessary for ERK activity oscillations. p90RSK2 silencing
or inhibition reduces the robustness of the MAPK pathways, and
synergizes with MAPK pathway inhibition.
9. Aoki K, Kumagai Y, Sakurai A, Komatsu N, Fujita Y, Shionyu C,
Matsuda M: Stochastic ERK activation induced by noise and
cell-to-cell propagation regulates cell density-dependent
proliferation. Mol Cell2013, 52:529– 540.
10. Regot S, Hughey JJ, Bajar BT, Carrasco S, Covert MW:High-
sensitivity measurements of multiple kinase activities in live
single cells. Cell 2014, 157:1724– 1734.
11. De La Cova C, Townley R, Regot S, Greenwald I:A real-time
biosensor for ERK activity reveals signaling dynamics during
C. elegans cell fate specification. Dev Cell2017, 42:
542– 553.e4.
12. Hiratsuka T, Bordeu I, Pruessner G, Watt FM:Regulation of ERK
basal and pulsatile activity control proliferation and exit from
the stem cell compartment in mammalian epidermis. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA2020, 117:17796– 17807.
13. Jacques M, Dobrzy/C19nski M, Gagliardi PA, Sznitman R, Pertz O:
CODEX, a neural network approach to explore signaling dy-
namics landscapes. Mol Syst Biol2021, 17, e10026.
14
*
. Simsek MF, Chandel AS, Saparov D, Zinani OQH, Clason N,
Özbudak EM: Periodic inhibition of Erk activity drives
sequential somite segmentation. Nature 2023, 613:153– 159.
This article shows that during somitogenesis the Her1– Her7 oscillator
periodically lowers ERK activity. The ERK oscillations then drive somite
segmentation. This article demonstrates that oscillations of ERK dy-
namics can drive repetitive pattern formation, such as somitogenesis.
15. Shankaran H, Ippolito DL, Chrisler WB, Resat H, Bollinger N,
Opresko LK, Wiley HS:Rapid and sustained
nuclear–cytoplasmic ERK oscillations induced by epidermal
growth factor. Mol Syst Biol2009, 5:332.
16
*
. Wilcockson SG, Guglielmi L, Araguas Rodriguez P, Amoyel M,
Hill CS: An improved Erk biosensor detects oscillatory Erk
dynamics driven by mitotic erasure during early develop-
ment. Dev Cell2023, 58:2802– 2818.e5.
In this article, the authors report the development of an improved ERK-
KTR biosensor to be more specific for ERK kinase activity, and to be
insensitive to Cdk1 kinase activity. They tested it in zebrafish and
Drosophila embryos. They identify a period before mitosis when ERK
activity shuts down.
17. Ram A, Murphy D, DeCuzzi N, Patankar M, Hu J, Pargett M,
Albeck JG:A guide to ERK dynamics, part 1: mechanisms and
models. Biochem J2023, 480:1887– 1907.
18. Huang CY, Ferrell JE:Ultrasensitivity in the mitogen-activated
protein kinase cascade. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA1996, 93:
10078– 10083.
19. Kocha/C19nczyk M, Kocieniewski P, Kozłowska E, Jaruszewicz-
Bło/C19nska J, Sparta B, Pargett M, Albeck JG, Hlavacek WS,
Lipniacki T: Relaxation oscillations and hierarchy of feed-
backs in MAPK signaling. Sci Rep2017, 7, 38244.
20. Ram A, Murphy D, DeCuzzi N, Patankar M, Hu J, Pargett M,
Albeck JG: A guide to ERK dynamics, part 2: downstream
decoding. Biochem J2023, 480:1909– 1928.
6 Cell Architecture 2024
Current Opinion in Cell Biology2024, 88:102368 www.sciencedirect.com
21. Hiratsuka T, Fujita Y, Naoki H, Aoki K, Kamioka Y, Matsuda M:
Intercellular propagation of extracellular signal-regulated
kinase activation revealed by in vivo imaging of mouse skin.
eLife 2015, 4, e05178.
22. Matsubayashi Y, Ebisuya M, Honjoh S, Nishida E:ERK activa-
tion propagates in epithelial cell sheets and regulates their
migration during wound healing. Curr Biol2004, 14:731– 735.
23. Aoki K, Kondo Y, Naoki H, Hiratsuka T, Itoh RE, Matsuda M:
Propagating wave of ERK activation orients collective cell
migration. Dev Cell2017, 43:305– 317.e5.
24. Hino N, Rossetti L, Marín-Llauradó A, Aoki K, Trepat X,
Matsuda M, Hirashima T:ERK-mediated mechanochemical
waves direct collective cell polarization. Dev Cell2020, 53:
646– 660.e8.
25. Gagliardi PA, Dobrzy/C19nski M, Jacques M-A, Dessauges C,
Ender P, Blum Y, Hughes RM, Cohen AR, Pertz O:Collective
ERK/Akt activity waves orchestrate epithelial homeostasis by
driving apoptosis-induced survival. Dev Cell2021, 56:
1712– 1726.e6.
26. Valon L, Davidovi/C19c A, Levillayer F, Villars A, Chouly M, Cerqueira-
Campos F, Levayer R:Robustness of epithelial sealing is an
emerging property of local ERK feedback driven by cell
elimination. Dev Cell2021, 56:1700– 1711.e8.
27
**
. Pond KW, Morris JM, Alkhimenok O, Varghese RP, Cabel CR,
Ellis NA, Chakrabarti J, Zavros Y, Merchant JL, Thorne CA,et al.:
Live-cell imaging in human colonic monolayers reveals ERK
waves limit the stem cell compartment to maintain epithelial
homeostasis. eLife 2022, 11, e78837.
This article shows that waves of ERK activity are triggered by apoptotic
cells in a primary culture of intestinal epithelium. These waves propa-
gate for multiple rows of neighbors. Interestingly, the propagation of
these waves corresponds to tissue patterning. Their propagation is
confined to the adult enterocytes’ compartment. On the contrary, the
region that is not reached by the waves is the crypt with stem cells.
28. Aikin TJ, Peterson AF, Pokrass MJ, Clark HR, Regot S:MAPK
activity dynamics regulate non-cell autonomous effects of
oncogene expression. eLife 2020, 9, e60541.
29
**
. Ender P, Gagliardi PA, Dobrzy/C19nski M, Frismantiene A,
Dessauges C, Höhener T, Jacques M-A, Cohen AR, Pertz O:
Spatiotemporal control of ERK pulse frequency coordinates
fate decisions during mammary acinar morphogenesis. Dev
Cell 2022, 57:2153– 2167.e6.
This paper reports the observation of single-cell ERK signaling dy-
namics during mammary acini morphogenesis in vitro. Each stage of
the morphogenetic program shows specific ERK dynamic patterns,
ranging from high ERK pulse frequency in the initial proliferating stage,
to the lower frequency in stage 2– 4. Interesting is the observation that
from stage 2, ERK activity occurs in waves. These events are important
to determine the survival of outer cells and death of inner cells, to form
a lumen. An oncogenic mutation in PI3K alters ERK dynamics and,
consequently, the morphogenesis. This article shows how signaling
waves can coordinate a complex 3D morphogenetic program.
30. De Simone A, Evanitsky MN, Hayden L, Cox BD, Wang J,
Tornini VA, Ou J, Chao A, Poss KD, Di Talia S:Control of
osteoblast regeneration by a train of Erk activity waves.
Nature 2021, 590:129– 133.
31. Ogura Y, Wen F-L, Sami MM, Shibata T, Hayashi S:A switch-
like activation relay of EGFR-ERK signaling regulates a wave
of cellular contractility for epithelial invagination. Dev Cell
2018, 46:162– 172.e5.
32. Ishii M, Tateya T, Matsuda M, Hirashima T:Retrograde ERK
activation waves drive base-to-apex multicellular flow in
murine cochlear duct morphogenesis. eLife 2021, 10, e61092.
33. Fan Y, Chai C, Li P, Zou X, Ferrell JE, Wang B:Ultrafast distant
wound response is essential for whole-body regeneration.
Cell 2023, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2023.06.019.
34. Lim B, Dsilva CJ, Levario TJ, Lu H, Schüpbach T, Kevrekidis IG,
Shvartsman SY: Dynamics of inductive ERK signaling in the
Drosophila embryo. Curr Biol2015, 25:1784– 1790.
35. Hirata H, Gupta M, Vedula SRK, Lim CT, Ladoux B, Sokabe M:
Actomyosin bundles serve as a tension sensor and a plat-
form for ERK activation. EMBO Rep2015, 16:250– 257.
36. Yang J-M, Bhattacharya S, West-Foyle H, Hung C-F, Wu T-C,
Iglesias PA, Huang C-H:Integrating chemical and mechanical
signals through dynamic coupling between cellular pro-
trusions and pulsed ERK activation. Nat Commun2018, 9:4673.
37. Klemke RL, Cai S, Giannini AL, Gallagher PJ, Lanerolle PD,
Cheresh DA: Regulation of cell motility by mitogen-activated
protein kinase. J Cell Biol1997, 137:481– 492.
38. Hirashima T, Hino N, Aoki K, Matsuda M:Stretching the limits of
extracellular signal-related kinase (ERK) signaling— cell
mechanosensing to ERK activation. Curr Opin Cell Biol2023,
84, 102217.
39
*
. Boocock D, Hirashima T, Hannezo E:Interplay between
mechanochemical patterning and glassy dynamics in cellular
monolayers. PRX Life2023, 1, 013001.
This article describes computational modeling of the emergence of
mechanochemical waves of ERK. By modulating different parameters,
such as the active migration forces and the mechanochemical
coupling, they observe a transition from a uniform active glass to pe-
riodic spatiotemporal waves.
40
*
. Lin S, Hirayama D, Maryu G, Matsuda K, Hino N, Deguchi E,
Aoki K, Iwamoto R, Terai K, Matsuda M:Redundant roles of
EGFR ligands in the ERK activation waves during collective
cell migration. Life Sci Alliance2022, 5, e202101206.
This article aims at solving the puzzle of which EGFR ligand mediates the
propagation of ERK waves. The authors found that the propagation of
ERK waves is significantly, albeit not completely, suppressed only when
EGF , HBEGF , TGFa and EREG are simultaneously removed. The waves
can be however restored by the re-expression of only one of them. This
suggests a redundant role for EGFR ligands in ERK wave propagation.
41
**
. Hino N, Matsuda K, Jikko Y, Maryu G, Sakai K, Imamura R,
Tsukiji S, Aoki K, Terai K, Hirashima T,et al.: A feedback loop
between lamellipodial extension and HGF-ERK signaling
specifies leader cells during collective cell migration. Dev
Cell 2022, 57:2290– 2304.e7.
This paper shows that during wound repair in kidney epithelial cells
in vitro, the leader cells, at the edge of the wound, have a specific ERK
signaling dynamic profile. These cells show sustained ERK activity due
to HGF-MET signaling that in turn activates ERK. This is in marked
contrast with the pulsatile ERK activity in the follower cells that is
necessary for ERK wave propagation.
42
**
. Hirashima T, Matsuda M:ERK-mediated curvature feedback
regulates branching morphogenesis in lung epithelial tissue.
Curr Biol2024, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2023.12.049.
This articles shows that ERK activity plays a role during branching
morphogenesis of lung epithelium. ERK activity is observed to be
higher in the curved region of epithelial tissues, due to FGF1 inter-
nalization. There, ERK activity determines an increase of actin poly-
merization, that reduces the curvature. This generates a
mechanochemical feedback loop that forms the branching points.
43. Muta Y, Fujita Y, Sumiyama K, Sakurai A, Taketo MM, Chiba T,
Seno H, Aoki K, Matsuda M, Imajo M:Composite regulation of
ERK activity dynamics underlying tumour-specific traits in
the intestine. Nat Commun2018, 9:2174.
44
**
. Gagliardi PA, Grädel B, Jacques M-A, Hinderling L, Ender P,
Cohen AR, Kastberger G, Pertz O, Dobrzy/C19nski M:Automatic
detection of spatio-temporal signaling patterns in cell col-
lectives. J Cell Biol2023, https://doi.org/10.1083/jcb.202207048.
This article describes a computational method to automatically identify
collective signaling events of ERK activity, in multiple different contexts.
This method is validated against a large variety of possible ERK waves
of different shape and size, some spontaneously occurring in epithelial
systems, others engineered with optogenetics, or produced via compu-
tational simulations. The article also describes how ERK waves are
altered by oncogenic mutations such as KRAS G12V and PIK3CA
H1047R.
45. Young CD, Zimmerman LJ, Hoshino D, Formisano L, Hanker AB,
Gatza ML, Morrison MM, Moore PD, Whitwell CA, Dave B,et al.:
Activating PIK3CA mutations induce an epidermal growth
factor receptor (EGFR)/Extracellular signal-regulated kinase
(ERK) paracrine signaling Axis in basal-like breast cancer*.
Mol Cell Proteomics2015, 14:1959– 1976.
46. Saha M, Carriere A, Cheerathodi M, Zhang X, Lavoie G, Rush J,
Roux PP, Ballif BA:RSK phosphorylates SOS1 creating 14-3-
3-docking sites and negatively regulating MAPK activation.
Biochem J2012, 447:159– 166.
MAPK/ERK signaling dynamics at multiple scalesGagliardi and Pertz 7
www.sciencedirect.com Current Opinion in Cell Biology2024, 88:102368