Commentary 1841
Introduction
Rho GTPases are key regulators of cytoskeletal dynamics in a
wide variety of morphogenetic events, such as cell migration,
axonal guidance, vesicle trafficking, cytokinesis and endocytosis
(Etienne-Manneville and Hall, 2002). They can also control many
other functions, such as cell-cycle progression and gene expression.
Rho GTPases cycle between an active GTP-loaded and an inactive
GDP-loaded state; this cycle is controlled by their interaction with
guanine nucleotide exchange factors (GEFs) and GTPase-activating
proteins (GAPs). In the activated form, they are competent in
binding to numerous effector proteins, which leads to the activation
of myriad downstream signals. Their ability to regulate so many
different functions, in highly dynamic cellular contexts, implies
that they are tightly regulated at the spatio-temporal level.
However, most of what we know about Rho GTPase signaling
has been based on a set of ‘classic’ Rho GTPase tools that do not
faithfully reflect this level of regulation. These include the use of
dominant-positive (DP) or -negative (DN) mutants of the three
canonical Rho GTPases: Rac1, Cdc42 and RhoA. These mutants
have been used to interfere with many different cellular processes.
Another tool is biochemical pulldown assays, which enable the
measurement of the average activation status of a given GTPase in
a population of cells. These approaches have clearly established
that Rho GTPases are master regulators of the cytoskeleton in
many different cellular contexts. They have also shown that each
GTPase can regulate a plethora of additional processes, such as
microbe killing through regulation of NADPH oxidase by Rac1
(Bokoch and Zhao, 2006) and gene transcription through the serum-
factor pathway by RhoA (Posern and Treisman, 2006).
In the context of the regulation of the cytoskeleton during cell
migration, the use of these different tools has led to the conceptual
framework that Rac1 regulates membrane protrusion at the leading
edge, Cdc42 controls filopodia formation and cell polarization, and
RhoA controls contractility at the back of the cell (Burridge
and Wennerberg, 2004). However, many lines of evidence support
an intrinsically more complicated picture of Rho GTPase signaling
during this process. For example, in contrast to the clear effects of
the overexpression of DN mutants, cells in which Rac1 (Wheeler
et al., 2006) or Cdc42 (Czuchra et al., 2005) have been genetically
ablated can still protrude lamellipodia and produce filopodia, and
only display very mild defects in cell migration. This suggests that
the contributions of Rac1 and Cdc42 to the process of cell migration
are much more subtle than we initially thought. Another example
is the finding that RhoA is linked not only to the generation of
contractility, but also to the regulation of microtubule stabilization
at the leading edge during directional cell migration (Bartolini and
Gundersen, 2009; Palazzo et al., 2001). Rather than involving Rho
kinase, this specific RhoA function requires stabilization of
microtubules through the effector mDia. RhoA therefore most
probably performs different functions at the front and at the back
of migrating cells, undoubtedly through selective interactions with
different downstream effectors. Such controversial results have
led to considerable confusion in the Rho GTPase field and
illustrate some of the limitations of the classic Rho GTPase
toolkit.
The development of technologies such as fluorescent probes
that report Rho GTPase signaling in time and space has yielded
important new insights that call for a novel conceptual framework
for Rho GTPase signaling. I will first briefly comment on the
design of different Rho GTPase biosensors and some experimental
considerations when imaging them. I will then concentrate on a
series of examples that illustrate the newly revealed complexity of
spatio-temporal Rho GTPase signaling compared with the classic
conceptual framework. Having this in mind, I will discuss the
Spatio-temporal Rho GTPase signaling – where are we
now?
Olivier Pertz
Institute for Biochemistry and Genetics, Department of Biomedicine, University of Basel, Mattenstraße 28, 4058 Basel, Switzerland
olivier.pertz@unibas.ch
Journal of Cell Science 123, 1841-1850 
© 2010. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd
doi:10.1242/jcs.064345
Summary
Rho-family GTPases are molecular switches that transmit extracellular cues to intracellular signaling pathways. Their regulation is
likely to be highly regulated in space and in time, but most of what is known about Rho-family GTPase signaling has been derived
from techniques that do not resolve these dimensions. New imaging technologies now allow the visualization of Rho GTPase signal ing
with high spatio-temporal resolution. This has led to insights that significantly extend classic models and call for a novel co nceptual
framework. These approaches clearly show three things. First, Rho GTPase signaling dynamics occur on micrometer length scales a nd
subminute timescales. Second, multiple subcellular pools of one given Rho GTPase can operate simultaneously in time and space t o
regulate a wide variety of morphogenetic events (e.g. leading-edge membrane protrusion, tail retraction, membrane ruffling). Th ese
different Rho GTPase subcellular pools might be described as ‘spatio-temporal signaling modules’ and might involve the specific
interaction of one GTPase with different guanine nucleotide exchange factors (GEFs), GTPase-activating proteins (GAPs) and
effectors. Third, complex spatio-temporal signaling programs that involve precise crosstalk between multiple Rho GTPase signaling
modules regulate specific morphogenetic events. The next challenge is to decipher the molecular circuitry underlying this compl ex
spatio-temporal modularity to produce integrated models of Rho GTPase signaling.
Key words: Rho GTPase, Fluorescence resonance energy transfer, Live-cell imaging, Cell motility, Systematic approaches
Journal of Cell Science
problems that are inherent to the classic Rho GTPase toolkit and
the need for new approaches to the dissection of the molecular
basis of these complex spatio-temporal signaling events.
Rho GTPase activation biosensors:
experimental considerations and design
The first problems to consider when imaging the spatio-temporal
dynamics of Rho GTPase activation are the low dynamic range of
activation of these proteins and their subcellular localization. Unlike
Ras GTPases, for which up to 40% of the cellular pool can be
activated by a physiological stimulus (Satoh and Kaziro, 1992),
only a very small fraction of the total Rho GTPase pool is activated
at one time in the cell. Even with a potent stimulus that leads to
robust phenotypical changes, biochemical pulldown assays show
that, at most, 5% of the total pool of RhoA is activated at any one
time in a cell (Ren et al., 1999). Similar values are found for Rac1
and Cdc42 (Benard et al., 1999). Furthermore, in contrast to Ras
GTPases, which are constitutively membrane anchored, most
Rho GTPases partition between the cytosol and membranes because
of their interaction with the Rho guanine dissociation inhibitor
(RhoGDI) (Michaelson et al., 2001). This is problematic for
imaging because the fluorescence signal of the large cytosolic pool
of inactive GTPases will mask any of the subtle events of membrane
recruitment and activation of the GTPase. This explains why simple
subcellular localization of a GTPase using immunostaining or
green fluorescent protein (GFP) fusions cannot reveal its activation.
This illustrates the need for sensors that specifically detect the
location at which Rho GTPases are activated. A large variety of
such sensors have been developed over the past ten years for
that purpose. Importantly, different biosensor designs might
necessitate different microscopy and image-analysis techniques,
and exhibit specific advantages and disadvantages. Thus, depending
on the specific aspect of Rho GTPase signaling under analysis or
the limitations imposed by the model cell system to be imaged, one
might have to choose between the different biosensors that are
available.
The most minimalist design is a simple fusion of an effector
domain with GFP. This construct will specifically translocate to
regions where a given GTPase is activated (Fig. 1A). These protein
fusions can be transfected or recombinantly expressed, and used as
affinity reagents for staining. This strategy has been successfully
used to show dynamic Cdc42 and RhoA GTPase activation patterns
in a Xenopus laevisoocyte wound-healing model system (Benink
and Bement, 2005), to monitor the pattern of RhoA inactivation
during basement-membrane breakdown in an avian model of
gastrulation (Nakaya et al., 2008) and to localize RhoA activation
during the genesis of the ciliated epithelium of Xenopus embryos
(Park et al., 2008). However, one caveat of such approaches is that
effector domains often bind to and will report activation of multiple
GTPases. For example, the effector domain of p21-activated kinase
(PAK) binds to GTP-Rac1 and GTP-Cdc42 (Benard et al., 1999).
The effector domain of WASP binds with high affinity to GTP-
Cdc42, but can also bind with lower affinity to GTP-Tc10 (a small
Rho family GTPase) (Hemsath et al., 2005). In this case, the
effector domain is most probably Cdc42 specific in vivo. Finally,
the effector domain of rhotekin binds to GTP-RhoA, GTP-RhoB
and GTP-RhoC (Ren et al., 1999).
To solve this specificity problem, a variety of more sophisticated
fluorescent probes have been engineered. A bimolecular
fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET) sensor (Fig. 1B)
has enabled the successful imaging of the location of Rac1
activation (Kraynov et al., 2000). In this case, the FRET signal
occurs when a microinjected bacterially expressed domain of PAK
that is labeled with an Alexa-Fluor-546 dye locally interacts with
active, exogenously expressed GFP-labeled Rac1. Because the
acceptor and donor fluorophores are bound to separate proteins
that might have different subcellular distributions, contributions to
the FRET image from donor-emission ‘bleed through’ and direct
excitation of the acceptor make the quantification of FRET
complicated. A fraction of these contributions must therefore be
subtracted from the raw FRET image; this will depend on the
specific filters used and must be quantified for each imaging
system. This strategy has nonetheless been successful multiple
times and can also be performed with genetically encoded
fluorophores such as CFP and YFP (Hoppe and Swanson, 2004).
To facilitate FRET quantification, a set of unimolecular probes
(Fig. 1C,D,E) has been designed in which the donor and acceptor
fluorophores are fused within a single chain. As both fluorophores
are then identically distributed throughout the cell, the
contributions of donor bleed through and direct acceptor excitation
are the same wherever the probe is analyzed. Thus, the corrections
that are necessary with bimolecular probes are not needed and the
FRET signal can be quantified as a simple ratio of FRET:donor
emission.
Different unimolecular probe designs also exist. In the ‘Raichu’
probes (Fig. 1C), a Rho-binding domain (RBD) and RhoA are
connected by a linker, and sandwiched between donor and
acceptor fluorophores (Yoshizaki et al., 2003). A structural
constraint therefore imposed by this design is that the C-terminal
polybasic CAAX sequence of RhoA has to be fused to one of the
GFP fluorophores, making the biosensor unable to interact with
RhoGDI and targeting it constitutively to the plasma membrane.
These probes can therefore monitor the effects of GEFs and
GAPs at the membrane, but will miss any regulation exerted by
RhoGDI at the level of cytosol-to-membrane shuttling. To resolve
this issue, another Raichu probe was designed, in which the RBD
effector domain is flanked with donor and acceptor fluorophores
(Fig. 1D) (Yoshizaki et al., 2003). In this case, binding of
endogenous active RhoA will trigger a conformational change in
the RBD and loss of FRET. Raichu probes for Rac1 and Cdc42
with a design similar to the two discussed above also exist (Itoh
et al., 2002). Another unimolecular probe design sandwiches the
donor and acceptor fluorophores between the RBD and RhoA,
leaving the RhoA C terminus free for correct geranyl-geranylation
and reversible interaction with membranes (Fig. 1E) (Pertz et al.,
2006).
Finally, an alternative to the FRET approach is to derive a
recombinantly expressed effector domain with a solvatochromic
dye that will undergo a change in fluorescence intensity in response
to solvent polarity (Fig. 1F) (Nalbant et al., 2004). When the
derivatized Cdc42-binding domain (CBD) interacts with
endogenous GTP-loaded Cdc42, the solvatochromic dye will
display an increase in fluorescence. The ratio of GFP to
merocyanine dye fluorescence will therefore highlight regions
where Cdc42 is active. Note that, as alluded to above, for all
single-effector-domain probes (Fig. 1A,D,F), one might not be
able to discern the active conformations of multiple GTPase
isoforms. Further reviews about the different strategies used to
build such biosensors are discussed in detail elsewhere (Hodgson
et al., 2008; Pertz and Hahn, 2004), as are the different
experimental considerations for imaging them (Hodgson et al.,
2006).
1842 Journal of Cell Science 123 (11)
Journal of Cell Science
Spatio-temporal modularity of Rho GTPase
signaling
The first report of a Rho GTPase FRET-based probe was published
in 2000 (Kraynov et al., 2000). This probe allowed the
spatio-temporal dynamics of Rac1 activation to be measured during
cell migration. Not surprisingly, the probe revealed that Rac
activation was confined to the leading lamellae and peripheral
ruffles of migrating fibroblasts. Similar results were observed with
Rac biosensors based on other designs (Itoh et al., 2002). However,
when the same probe was imaged in chemotactic neutrophils, Rac
activation was observed in the retracting uropod, in addition to the
leading edge, suggesting that Rac can also function at the back of
the cell in this context (Gardiner et al., 2002). Probes that revealed
the subcellular location of active Cdc42 again reported activity
at the leading edge (Itoh et al., 2002; Nalbant et al., 2004); however,
depending on the cellular context, Cdc42 activity was also clearly
observed simultaneously in the Golgi compartment (Nalbant et al.,
2004). Surprisingly, despite the prediction that RhoA is activated
in the cell body and at the back of the cell to control acto-myosin
contractility (Burridge and Wennerberg, 2004), and consistent with
a role for RhoA at the leading edge (Cook et al., 1998), FRET
probes that reported RhoA activation (Kurokawa et al., 2005; Pertz
et al., 2006) revealed that the bulk of RhoA activation occurs
directly at the leading edge of protruding lamellae in fibroblasts
(Fig. 2A). However, transient bursts of RhoA activation were also
simultaneously observed at the back of the cell during robust
1843Spatio-temporal Rho GTPase signaling
Membrane
CFP
RBD
 RhoA
YFP
ACTIVATION
GDP
RhoA
Membrane
GTP
RhoA
RBDGFP
RBD
GFP
RhoGDI
GDP
RhoA
GTP
RhoA
Membrane
ACTIVATION
A GFP-effector translocation sensor B Bimolecular FRET sensor
C Unimolecular FRET sensor (fluorophores-outside design)
F Effector-domain sensor with solvatochromic dye
RhoGDI
GDP
Rac1
Membrane
ACTIVATION
GFP
GFP
PBD
PBD
GTP
Rac1
FRET
CBD
GFP
RhoGDI
GDP
Cdc42
Membrane
ACTIVATION
GTP
Cdc42
CBD
GFP
Membrane
CFP
 YFPRBD RhoA
RhoGDI
ACTIVATION
GDP
RhoA
GTP
RhoA
E Unimolecular FRET sensor (fluorophores-inside design)
RhoGDI
GDP
RhoA
Membrane
ACTIVATION
CFP
 YFP
RBD
GTP
RhoA
CFP
 YFP
RBD
D Unimolecular FRET effector-domain sensor
FRET
FRET
FRET
Fig. 1. Design of different Rho GTPase activation biosensors.(A)GFP-effector translocation biosensor. (B)Bimolecular FRET Rac sensor. The red circle
represents a dye that was covalently coupled to the PAK-binding domain (PBD). (C,D)Raichu unimolecular FRET RhoA sensors. (E)Unimolecular FRET RhoA
sensor with a fluorophores-inside design. (F)Solvatochromic-dye-based sensor. The red circle represents a solvatochromic dye that was coupled to the Cdc42-
binding domain (CBD) of WASP. The red star represents the increased fluorescence emission upon binding of the probe to active Cdc42. RBD, Rho-binding
domain of rhotekin.
Journal of Cell Science
1844 Journal of Cell Science 123 (11)
B Signaling modules: Cdc42
F Signaling program: phagocytosis
A Signaling modules: RhoA
RhoA module 1:
GEF 1, GAP 1, effector 1
RhoA module 2:
GEF 2, GAP 2, effector 2
RhoA module 3:
GEF 3, GAP 3, effector 3
RhoA module 4:
GEF 4, GAP 4, effector 4
FLIM signal:
GFP-PAK / Cy3-Cdc42
Cdc42 module 1:
GEF 1, GAP 1, PAK1
Membrane protrusion
Cdc42 module 2:
GEF 2, GAP 2, N-WASP
Endosomal traffic
GFP-PAK
GFP-N-WASP
FLIM signal:
GFP-N-WASP / Cy3-Cdc42
GTP-Cdc42
GTP-Rac1
GTP-Rac2
Time (minutes)1 3 57 9
C Signaling program: membrane protrusion D Different signaling programs in membrane protrusion
0 4 8 12
Fibronectin-induced
protrusion
PDGF-induced
protrusion
Time (minutes)
RhoA activation
E Signaling program: oocyte wound healing
Active Rho
Active Cdc42
Membrane protrusion
Tail retraction
Macropinocytosis Membrane ruffling
Fig. 2. Visualizing spatio-temporal Rho GTPase signaling. (A)RhoA activation patterns during cell migration, as visualized with a FRET RhoA sensor (Pertz
et al., 2006). Different morphogenetic behaviors are shown. The RhoA activation signal is coded so that ‘warm’ and ‘cold’ colors represent regions of high and
low activation, respectively. White arrows point to the specific subcellular zones at which RhoA is activated. Image reproduced from Pertz et al. (Pertz et al.,
2006) with permission. (B)Differential coupling of Cdc42 with different effectors at different subcellular locations. The interaction of a GFP-tagged effector and
Cy3-labeled Cdc42 is measured using FLIM (Parsons et al., 2005). The images are color coded so that warm colors represent regions where each effector
interacts with Cdc42 (red and yellow, interaction with effector; blue, no interaction). Image reproduced from Parsons et al. (Parsons et al., 2005) with permission.
(C)Model of the dynamic spatio-temporal activation profiles of Rac1, Cdc42 and RhoA during leading-edge membrane protrusion (Machacek et al., 2009). The
black line represents the leading-edge boundary, and arrows indicate membrane protrusion and retraction behavior. Different-colored zones represent RhoA
(grey), Cdc42 (blue) and Rac1 (green) activation. Image reproduced from Machacek et al. (Machacek et al., 2009) with permission. (D)Different RhoA GTPase
signaling patterns during membrane protrusion induced by fibronectin or PDGF stimulation (Pertz et al., 2006). Images are color coded as in A. Image
reproduced from Pertz et al. (Pertz et al., 2006) with permission. (E)Cdc42 and RhoA activation zones during wound healing of a Xenopus oocyte. eGFP-rRBD,
GFP fusion to the effector domain of rhotekin; mRFP-wGBD, mRFP fusion to the effector domain of WASP. Image reproduced from Benink and Bement
(Benink and Bement, 2005) with permission. (F)Model of Cdc42, Rac1 and Rac2 activation during phagocytic uptake of an IgG-opsonized erythrocyte (Hoppe
and Swanson, 2004). Each different-colored zone represents the activation pattern of one specific GTPase. Image reproduced from Hoppe and Swanson
(Hoppe and Swanson, 2004) with permission.
Journal of Cell Science
tail-retraction events. Further zones of RhoA activation were
observed on peripheral ruffles and on actively moving
macropinosomes (Fig. 2A).
In addition to the surprising finding that direct measurement of
the subcellular location of Rho GTPase activation sometimes
contradicts the conceptual framework derived from the classic Rho
GTPase toolkit, many other novel insights are evident. One
important lesson is that one Rho GTPase can be simultaneously
activated at multiple, discrete subcellular locations, where it seems
to regulate distinct cellular functions that are important for cell
morphogenesis (Fig. 2A). Most likely, each of these individual
pools of active Rho GTPase represents the specific interaction of
a GTPase with different upstream regulators, such as GEFs and
GAPs, and distinct downstream effectors to regulate precise
morphogenetic cell behavior. This becomes evident when the
interaction of one GTPase with two different downstream effectors
is visualized using FRET and fluorescence lifetime imaging (FLIM)
(Parsons et al., 2005). In breast cancer cells, the interaction of
active Cdc42 with its PAK effector occurs at the cell periphery,
especially in cell protrusions. However, the interaction of active
Cdc42 with its N-WASP effector occurs within an endosomal
compartment that localizes throughout the cell (Fig. 2B). This high
degree of specificity probably occurs through the formation of
precise macromolecular complexes in time and space.
Consistently, there are several cases in which multiple
components of the Rho GTPase signaling machinery are found in
large macromolecular complexes. For example, the Rac1- and
Cdc42-specific GEF Pix has been found to bind efficiently to the
effector PAK (Obermeier et al., 1998). During neutrophil
chemotaxis, G protein  subunits that have been liberated by
chemoattractants acting on the G i heterotrimeric G protein can
recruit a complex containing Pix, PAK and Cdc42 to the leading
edge; this is essential for directional sensing and persistence of
polarized cell migration (Li et al., 2003). Here, PAK functions both
as a scaffold for the recruitment of Pix and as a target of Cdc42,
with both interactions enabling the formation of an autoactivation
loop. This suggests that this protein complex can work as a discrete
signaling unit. Similar complexes have been described between the
Rac-specific GEF Tiam1 and the effectors IRSp53 and Wave2
(Connolly et al., 2005), and between Tiam1, the effectors Par3,
Par6 and aPKC (atypical protein kinase C), and the GTPase Cdc42
(Mertens et al., 2005; Pegtel et al., 2007). Thus, an attractive
hypothesis is that preformed macromolecular complexes allow the
coupling of GEFs with specific effectors upon interaction with an
activated GTPase, enabling the spatio-temporal modularity of Rho
GTPase signaling that is obvious from imaging methods. Such
spatio-temporal signaling complexes that operate in time and space
to regulate specific morphogenetic events (leading-edge protrusion,
tail retraction, etc.) might be referred to as ‘spatio-temporal
signaling modules’.
In the context of single-cell biology, this suggests that we can
no longer have a ‘Rho-GTPase-centric’ vision of Rho GTPase
signaling, in which one GTPase performs one specific function.
Rather, we now have to discern different Rho-GTPase-dependent
functions that operate in time and space. The challenge that lies
ahead is thus to define the molecular composition of these spatio-
temporal signaling modules, which consist of specific Rho
GTPases, GEFs, GAPs, effectors and additional interacting proteins
that operate upstream or downstream of the given GTPase. At the
same time, we must also gain insight into the mechanistic function
of each of these modules. Importantly, this provides a conceptual
framework that can explain the finding that GEFs, GAPs and
effectors outnumber their GTPase targets (Bishop and Hall, 2000;
Moon and Zheng, 2003; Rossman et al., 2005).
Spatio-temporal Rho GTPase signaling
programs
Another insight provided by spatio-temporal Rho GTPase
measurements is that complex spatio-temporal signaling programs
that involve precise crosstalk between multiple GTPases are put in
place by the cell to fine-tune specific morphogenetic events. For
example, in the context of cell migration, FRET probes and
biochemical experiments clearly indicate that all three canonical
Rho GTPases are activated at the leading edge of migrating
fibroblasts or other cells (Cho and Klemke, 2002; Itoh et al., 2002;
Kraynov et al., 2000; Kurokawa et al., 2005; Nalbant et al., 2004;
Pertz et al., 2006). This then begs the question of how crosstalk
occurs between all three GTPases in time and space to regulate the
leading-edge extension process. Using computer vision approaches
to merge spatio-temporal measurements of RhoA, Rac1 and Cdc42
activation performed in different cells, and using different
biosensors, it was possible to identify the time and location of the
activation of the three GTPases during fibroblast leading-edge
membrane protrusion. This revealed a characteristic pattern of
GTPase activation in highly confined subcellular domains, on the
order of micrometers, and occurring with precise time shifts, on
the order of tens of seconds (Machacek et al., 2009) (Fig. 2C). In
these fibroblasts, leading-edge advancement occurs in cycles of
protrusion and retraction, with one cycle lasting 90 seconds. RhoA
is activated directly at the leading edge at the onset of membrane
protrusion, but is switched off during and uncoupled from
membrane retraction. Rac1 and Cdc42 are switched on later during
the protrusion phase, and persist longer during retraction.
Antagonistic crosstalk between the GTPases is obvious, as zones
of Rac1 and Cdc42 activation lag behind and are mutually exclusive
with the zone of RhoA activation that occurs directly at the leading
edge. This illustrates the complexity of Rho GTPase signaling
during membrane protrusion and challenges the notion that Rac1
and Cdc42 are the initiators of membrane protrusion in this precise
cellular context.
An additional level of complexity came from the discovery that
there are different modes of Rho GTPase signaling at the leading
edge induced by different extracellular cues (Pertz et al., 2006). The
complex spatio-temporal Rho GTPase signaling program discussed
above, which involves precise activation of all three GTPases, was
observed in fibroblasts randomly migrating on a fibronectin matrix
(Machacek et al., 2009) and therefore probably depends on integrin
signaling. However, when the same fibroblasts are induced to extend
protrusions through stimulation by platelet-derived growth factor
(PDGF), virtually no RhoA activation is observed in membrane
protrusions (Kurokawa et al., 2005; Pertz et al., 2006) (Fig. 2D).
Thus, additional signaling through a receptor tyrosine kinase seems
to induce a different Rho GTPase signaling program that might
lead to cell migration with distinct morphodynamics. This remains
to be tested, but will require the establishment of an assay that
challenges fibroblasts with gradients of PDGF to induce robust
chemotactic behavior. A similar signaling program is also evident
in specialized chemotactic cells, such as neutrophils, in which RhoA
activation is absent from the leading edge and is observed solely in
the retracting uropod and on peripheral ruffles (Wong et al., 2006).
Most likely, Rac1 and Cdc42 are the sole players in the process of
leading-edge extension in these two cell-migration systems.
1845Spatio-temporal Rho GTPase signaling
Journal of Cell Science
A complex Rho GTPase signaling program was also observed
during wound healing in single Xenopus oocytes (Benink and
Bement, 2005). Rapid accumulation of F-actin filaments is triggered
around the wound to allow its closure. Multiplexed activation
measurements revealed dynamic, mutually exclusive RhoA and
Cdc42 activation zones that move inward as the actin array closes
(Fig. 2E). This process depends on calcium and is controlled by
input from the cortical actin cytoskeleton and microtubules, and
crosstalk between the GTPases themselves. Another important
example is the phagocytic uptake of IgG-opsonized erythrocytes
(Hoppe and Swanson, 2004). Highly defined zones of Rho GTPase
activation occur and correlate with different stages of the formation
and maturation of the phagocytic cup. In the first phase of particle
binding, Cdc42 is activated within a subcellular domain that
localizes to a band of actin that triggers pseudopod extension
(Hoppe and Swanson, 2004) (Fig. 2F). Shortly delayed Rac1
activation then occurs at the same location. During the subsequent
phase of phagosome contraction and closure, Rac1 is activated a
second time on the inner phagosomal membrane; Rac2 is
concurrently activated at the base of the phagosome.
These different studies clearly define the scales of time and
length at which the signaling events regulating different
morphogenetic processes occur, and illustrate the need to analyze
these signaling events with adequate spatio-temporal resolution.
Importantly, the common practice of analyzing single snapshots of
the signaling state of a given Rho GTPase, even with high spatial
resolution, cannot provide a clear understanding of Rho GTPase
signaling. Rather, the analysis of the whole continuum of spatio-
temporal Rho GTPase activation is needed. For each morphogenetic
event, it will be important in the future to identify the players
(GTPase, GEF, GAP and effector) that operate within each spatio-
temporal signaling module and examine how crosstalk occurs
between these modules within the relevant signaling program.
Understanding which effectors are operating downstream of each
GTPase will explain the specific contribution of each signaling
module to a specific morphogenetic process. Identification of the
GEFs, GAPs and their upstream signaling networks relevant to
each signaling module will allow us to understand the complex
crosstalk between each GTPase. In that respect, the observation of
antagonistic RhoA and Cdc42 activation zones during both
fibroblast leading-edge membrane protrusion (Machacek et al.,
2009) and oocyte wound healing (Benink and Bement, 2005)
suggests that there are conserved mechanisms to set up such spatio-
temporal Rho GTPase signaling programs. This might be the real
significance of the classic antagonistic relationship between Rac1,
Cdc42 and RhoA that has been documented using global Rho
GTPase signaling manipulation (Nimnual et al., 2003; Sander et al.,
1999).
The limits of global manipulations and
measurements
Although the classic Rho GTPase toolkit has enabled us to
understand the foundations of Rho GTPase signaling, the fine
modularity that is evident from spatio-temporal Rho GTPase
measurements is not necessarily compatible with most of the
insights provided by the global measurements and manipulations
that have been performed until now. Given the spatial and time
scales on which different Rho GTPase signaling modules and
programs operate, it becomes clear that the global manipulations
imposed by the classic Rho GTPase toolkit might also induce
artifacts.
Overexpression of a DP Rho GTPase mutant should, in principle,
lead to substantial signaling by all the effectors expressed in a cell
that usually operate within the different spatio-temporal signaling
modules that depend on this GTPase (Fig. 1A). One can therefore
ask why global manipulation of the signaling activity of a given
Rho GTPase does not give information about all the functions
of the different effectors activated by this GTPase, rather than
inducing the highly specific cytoskeletal phenotypes that are
typically observed (e.g. overexpression of DP RhoA leads to a
robust contractile phenotype, but does not reveal a role for leading-
edge extension). The most obvious explanation is that, in contrast
to the in vivo situation (in which the levels of active Rho GTPases
are tightly regulated and occur in highly defined subcellular
regions), when a Rho GTPase is globally activated, its effectors
might aberrantly signal outside of the spatio-temporal context of
their specific signaling modules. In this situation, the contributions
of some effectors might then simply be dominant over others and
there will thus be bias towards a specific phenotype. Therefore, the
robust contractile phenotype induced by RhoA hyperactivation,
which occurs through its effector Rho kinase, might simply be
stronger than and mask any contributions from other RhoA-
dependent effectors that are linked to membrane protrusion or
other functions. Importantly, when cells are induced to have high
RhoA, but low Rho kinase activity, the contributions of RhoA to
membrane protrusion are obvious (Tsuji et al., 2002). Therefore,
the classic phenotype induced by DP RhoA might not be very
informative about all the functions that depend on this GTPase.
Because they most probably act by titrating active GEFs,
overexpression of DN Rho GTPase mutants has the potential to
affect several pathways and thus will globally interfere with
multiple spatio-temporal signaling modules. Furthermore, because
many GEFs can activate multiple GTPases (Rossman et al., 2005),
a DN GTPase mutant might target more GTPases than the one it
intends to. This provides an explanation for the clear differences
in cell-migration phenotype observed when fibroblasts devoid of
Cdc42 or expressing DN Cdc42 are compared (Czuchra et al.,
2005). In fact, any global manipulation, such as overexpression of
GEFs, GAPs and effectors in wild-type or mutant form, is likely
to switch Rho GTPase regulation from local to global to some
extent, leading the overexpressed signaling component to function
outside of the proper context of its precise spatio-temporal signaling
module. In the case of upstream regulators (GEFs, GAPs), this
might lead to the non-discriminant activation of multiple signaling
modules, rather than only one. In the case of effector pathways, the
downstream signaling events will no longer be restricted to
the precise subcellular zones where they should, in principle, occur.
Finally, biochemical pulldown assays, which measure an average
of the signaling states of thousands of cells, will also not be able
to capture the underlying spatio-temporal complexity of Rho
GTPase signaling. These experiments often require that the
signaling state of the cell population be homogenized by overly
gross stimuli that are unlikely to be physiologically relevant. Again,
this might switch Rho GTPase signaling from a local to a global
mode, leading to large-scale effects that mask any of the more
subtle spatio-temporal patterns that are important for the regulation
of cell morphogenesis.
Spatio-temporal signaling modularity and the
need for systematic approaches
If Rho GTPase signaling involves the precise, coordinated action
of multiple signaling modules in space and time, then the correct
1846 Journal of Cell Science 123 (11)
Journal of Cell Science
description of a given cell behavior will require insight into all the
players operating in each of the signaling modules. This will
require systematic approaches to identify and characterize all the
components of the multiple signaling modules that cooperate to
regulate a given cellular process (cell migration, neurite outgrowth,
phagocytosis, etc.). As suggested above, this will not be accessible
with global measurements and manipulations using most of the
commonly available tools, but will require more subtle
perturbations. This can, in principle, be achieved by individually
targeting the different players in the multiple signaling modules
that regulate a specific morphogenetic process using loss-of-
function approaches (i.e. gene-knockout or RNA-interference
approaches).
A panel of recent studies illustrates such systematic approaches
to studying Rho GTPase signaling modularity. In 3D environments,
tumor cells can switch between mesenchymal or amoeboid modes
of invasion, which depend on high levels of Rac1 or RhoA
activation, respectively. To identify the specific players that achieve
1847Spatio-temporal Rho GTPase signaling
A BPore size: 3 µm
Soma
Neurite
Soma Neurite
Total Cdc42
GTP-Cdc42
Erk2
Total Rac1
GTP-Rac1
Erk2
Rac and Cdc42 effectors
RhoA effectorsAdditional Rho-GTPase-interacting
proteins with less-defined roles
GAPs and interacting proteinsTRIO
SNX5
ASAP2
ASAP2
EPS15
NUMB
SNAP25
KIF5A
SNAP23
SOS1 ITSN1
TUBB3
GIT2
CBLB
SCRIB
ARHGEF7
GIT1
CASK
KIF1A
PTPRF EXOC1
GNA12
ELMO2
GNA13
MAP1B
GNAQ
MAP1A
ARHGEF11
MACF1
HIP1R
MYO18A
ARHGEF1
ABL2
MAP4K5
TSG101
BCR
PACSIN1
ARHGAP17 ARAP1
DLC1 SRGAP2
ARHGAP1 ARHGAP5
DOCK10
DOCK4
DOCK7
RGNEF KALRN
ARHGEF2
SWAP70DOCK9
ARHGEF3
CDC42 RAC1
RHOA
NCK1
SH3GLB2
DAAM1
VAMP2
STX1A
LGALS1
UNC119
PLXNB1
CTNND1
PITPNM1
APLP2
MYO9B
PIK3R1
PLCG1 SLK
PRKCA
SRC
PLXNA1
PKN1
PKN2
R OCK1
ROCK2
RTKN
MAPK8
PARD3
FMNL1 CLIP1
IQGAP2
TRIP10
PIP5K3 BAIAP2
ABI1
WASF2
CYFIP1 CYFIP2
Effectors
Rho-GTPase-interacting
proteins with less-defined roles
Rho GTPases
GEFs
GAPs
GEF- and GAP-
interacting proteins
GEFs and interacting proteins
Transcriptional regulator
Kinase
Transmembrane receptor Other
Transporter
Enzyme
Laminin
coating
C
Key
Fig. 3. Rho GTPase signaling network regulating neurite outgrowth.(A)Strategy for the purification of extending neurites. Neuroblastoma cells are plated on
3m microporous filters that are coated with laminin on the bottom to allow directional neurite outgrowth as described by Pertz et al. (Pertz et al., 2008). The small
pore size ensures that only neurites squeeze through and enables selective purification of neurite and soma fractions. (B)Rac1 and Cdc42 activation status in
extending neurites. Pulldown was performed on equivalent amounts of neurite and soma lysate. Erk2 serves as a loading control. (C)Rac1, Cdc42 and RhoA
interaction network in the neurite. The neurite proteome was mined for proteins that are known to interact directly with the three GTPases or with their GEFs and
GAPs using Ingenuity Pathways (http://www.ingenuity.com). Each line represents a protein-protein interaction documented in the literature. Proteins are named
according to their official gene symbol in Entrez gene (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov). Further information about these proteins is found in supplementary material
Table S1. Images in A and B reproduced from Pertz et al. (Pertz et al., 2008) with permission.
Journal of Cell Science
the high activation levels of Rac1 or RhoA, a small interfering
RNA (siRNA) screen that targets all Rho-GTPase-specific GEFs
and GAPs was performed using the characteristic morphology of
each cell migration mode as read-out (Sanz-Moreno et al., 2008).
A Rac-specific GEF, DOCK3, regulates Rac and its WA VE2
effector to drive mesenchymal movement and suppress amoeboid
movement. Conversely, in amoeboid movement, RhoA signaling
through ROCK and the Rac-specific GAP ARHGAP22 leads to
Rac1 inactivation and suppression of mesenchymal movement. An
important insight provided by this study is that the effectors that
are important for the regulation of the specific cytoskeletal
behaviors downstream of each GTPase also feed into the negative
regulation of the specific Rho GTPase that is repressed in each
respective program. Given the highly penetrant phenotypes
observed, the players that have been identified here are certainly
the master switches in regulating the interconversion between cell-
invasion modes. However, the complexity of the spatio-temporal
activation patterns described in the preceding sections suggests
that there will be additional layers of Rho GTPase signaling that
operate on top of these signaling pathways to allow the fine-tuning
of the precise morphodynamics of these cell behaviors. These
might have been missed in the screen because of their more subtle
nature and might need much more sensitive read-outs.
This higher degree of complexity became apparent in another
study, in which the Rho GTPase signaling program that regulates
neurite outgrowth has been analyzed. To get a biochemical handle
on spatio-temporal signaling, a fractionation method that separates
extending neurites from the soma of neuronal-like cells was
engineered (Pertz et al., 2008) (Fig. 3A). Effector pulldown assays
revealed that Rac1 and Cdc42 activities are confined to the
extending neurite (Fig. 3B). Using quantitative proteomics and
bioinformatic approaches, a highly complex, neurite-localized
potential signaling network was unveiled involving Rac1, Cdc42,
RhoA, a large number of GEFs, GAPs and effectors, and additional
proteins known to interact directly with Rho GTPases (Fig. 3C).
Obviously, the complexity of this network is consistent with the
elaborate signaling programs that are observed using FRET
biosensors, but not with the simple view that Rac1 and Cdc42 are
solely responsible for neurite extension (da Silva and Dotti, 2002).
To explore the significance of this complexity, a small part of this
interaction network was functionally probed using a small siRNA
screen targeted against a set of neurite-enriched Rac1- and Cdc42-
specific GEFs and GAPs. Surprisingly, irrespectively of whether a
GEF or a GAP is knocked down, increased neurite outgrowth
is observed in most cases, whereas loss of neurite outgrowth is
never observed. However, taking a more sensitive approach to
resolving the dynamics of the neurite-outgrowth process using
time-lapse microscopy revealed a large spectrum of subtle
morphodynamic phenotypes that simply were not accessible with
steady-state measurements. The candidate genes targeted here
displayed phenotypes that consisted of ‘subfunctions’ of neurite
outgrowth, such as establishment of polarity during neurite path
finding, initiation of neurite outgrowth or regulation of the stability
of filopodia on the growth cone. This approach thus again illustrates
a more complex level of regulation than initially anticipated, and
allows the assignment of different GEFs and GAPs to the distinct
spatio-temporal signaling modules that regulate a large variety of
specific functions in the cell.
These examples illustrate why it will be important in the future
to take systematic approaches to deconstruct the spatio-temporal
signaling modules and programs that underlie different cellular
behaviors (cell migration, phagocytosis, etc.). A roadmap for the
complete elucidation of such spatio-temporal signaling networks
might be as follows. In a first, exploratory, phase, siRNA screens
(or loss-of-function screens using other methods) will allow us to
identify and pinpoint the specific functions of a Rho GTPase
interactome in a given cell behavior. Obviously, knockdown of
proteins that are part of a specific signaling module will produce a
spectrum of morphodynamic phenotypes affecting one specific
cellular function. Thus, phenotypic clustering should allow the
prediction of which components are part of a specific signaling
module. Once the different spatio-temporal signaling modules have
been identified, further experiments will have to be performed for
their validation and further characterization. Perturbation of the
signaling components upstream of the GTPase (GEFs, GAPs and
upstream pathways) in a specific signaling module should lead to
aberrant spatio-temporal Rho GTPase activation profiles that
correlate with specific morphodynamic phenotypes. These will
then be evaluated using fluorescent biosensors of Rho GTPase
activation. Validation of the downstream signaling components
will require imaging methods to measure the transient and highly
localized interactions between a GTPase and an effector of a given
signaling module. As mentioned above, this can be done using a
FRET approach (Parsons et al., 2005). Simultaneous visualization
of cytoskeletal and adhesion dynamics with Rho GTPase activation
profiles, in the native and disturbed states, will also give essential
cues about the effector functions of specific signaling modules.
Because of the fine spatio-temporal crosstalk between Rho
GTPases, one should also keep in mind that affecting one signaling
module might also lead to collateral effects on other ones.
The full characterization of such complex signaling programs
will require multidisciplinary approaches and the establishment of
novel technologies to quantify the complex space-and-time-resolved
datasets. One important problem of single-cell biology is noise.
Whereas the phagocytosis and oocyte wound-healing examples
(Fig. 1E,F) are intrinsically robust behaviors, and relatively simple
image-analysis techniques allow us to quantify their dynamics, cell
migration is much more prone to noise in that many
morphodynamic phenotypes are observed. Here, the multiplexing
of the activation profiles of multiple GTPases at the leading edge of
migrating fibroblasts (Machacek et al., 2009) (Fig. 1C) was only
possible using sophisticated computer vision tools that allowed the
pooling of ‘noisy’ measurements from multiple cells into
statistically relevant data sets. Only then was the determination of
both the spatio-temporal crosstalk between Rho GTPases and how
it relates to cell behavior possible. This gives a flavor of the
methods of analysis that we will have to use in the future. Similar
image-analysis methods are needed for the comprehensive
quantification of complex morphological phenotypes that, in the
cases of 3D cancer-cell invasion and neurite-outgrowth systems
mentioned above, were only verbally described. Such an image-
analysis approach has been used with neural networks to extract
quantitative morphological signatures from static pictures of
migrating cells in which different signaling molecules have been
genetically disturbed (Bakal et al., 2007). This enabled the complex
morphological phenotypes of migrating Drosophila melanogaster
cells to be unraveled, and allowed unbiased clustering of genes
associated with different cellular processes, such as cell protrusion,
adhesion and tension.
Another approach might be to try to experimentally eliminate
the cellular noise by devising precise microenvironments that
recapitulate the extracellular cues observed in vivo to induce robust
1848 Journal of Cell Science 123 (11)
Journal of Cell Science
prototypical cell behaviors. In the context of cell migration, this
could be achieved by using microfluidic devices to challenge cells
with highly defined chemokine gradients to induce robust and
standardized directional movement (Chung et al., 2007). Finally,
we will also need methods to acutely manipulate Rho GTPase
signaling in time and space. Two recent examples illustrate the
possibility of ‘caging’ the activation of Rac1 in single living cells
(Levskaya et al., 2009; Wu et al., 2009). Both studies show that
localized Rac photoactivation is enough to trigger membrane
protrusion. Importantly, whereas constitutive membrane protrusions
of fibroblasts display high Rac1 and RhoA activation,
protrusions that were induced by acute, local Rac1 photoactivation
show low RhoA activation (Wu et al., 2009). This suggests that,
upon a certain activation threshold at the leading edge, Rac1 locally
antagonizes RhoA activation and is sufficient to drive membrane
protrusion. This technique will facilitate the study of crosstalk
between different GTPases in different Rho GTPase signaling
programs.
Concluding remarks
Although the classic Rho GTPase toolkit has laid the foundations
for studying Rho GTPase signaling, it is now time to move from
a global ‘Rho-GTPase-centric’ view to a precise understanding of
the spatio-temporal modularity of Rho GTPase signaling. This will
hopefully resolve many controversial results observed in the past
and provide novel conceptual frameworks. As emphasized in this
Commentary, the future of spatio-temporal Rho GTPase signaling
is about the systematic mapping of the multiple signaling modules
that regulate different morphogenetic cell behaviors and
understanding how crosstalk between these signaling modules
establishes complex signaling programs. This should lead to an
integrated view of Rho GTPase signaling. Because this endeavor
necessitates more sensitive cellular read outs, this will enhance
further understanding of many Rho GTPase effectors, GEFs and
GAPs that have been only marginally studied until now, and thus
is likely to expand the repertoire of Rho GTPase functions. This
will require interdisciplinary approaches and the establishment of
novel quantitative technologies to manipulate and measure Rho
GTPase signaling. Ultimately, the combination of these different
quantitative approaches should provide data that are amenable to
modeling, yielding an accurate understanding of these complex
signaling networks.
This work was supported by grants from the Swiss National
Science Foundation, the Roche Research Foundation, Novartis, the
International Foundation for Paraplegy, the SystemsX.ch Initiative,
Oncosuisse and the University of Basel.
Supplementary material available online at
http://jcs.biologists.org/cgi/content/full/123/11/1841/DC1
References
Bakal, C., Aach, J., Church, G. and Perrimon, N. (2007). Quantitative morphological
signatures define local signaling networks regulating cell morphology. Science 316,
1753-1756.
Bartolini, F. and Gundersen, G. G.(2010). Formins and microtubules. Biochim. Biophys.
Acta 1803, 164-173.
Benard, V ., Bohl, B. P. and Bokoch, G. M. (1999). Characterization of rac and cdc42
activation in chemoattractant-stimulated human neutrophils using a novel assay for
active GTPases. J. Biol. Chem. 274, 13198-13204.
Benink, H. A. and Bement, W. M. (2005). Concentric zones of active RhoA and Cdc42
around single cell wounds. J. Cell Biol. 168, 429-439.
Bishop, A. L. and Hall, A. (2000). Rho GTPases and their effector proteins. Biochem. J.
348, 241-255.
Bokoch, G. M. and Zhao, T. (2006). Regulation of the phagocyte NADPH oxidase by
Rac GTPase. Antioxid. Redox Signal. 8, 1533-1548.
Burridge, K. and Wennerberg, K.(2004). Rho and Rac take center stage. Cell 116, 167-
179.
Cho, S. Y. and Klemke, R. L. (2002). Purification of pseudopodia from polarized cells
reveals redistribution and activation of Rac through assembly of a CAS/Crk scaffold.
J. Cell Biol. 156, 725-736.
Chung, B. G., Park, J. W., Hu, J. S., Huang, C., Monuki, E. S. and Jeon, N. L.(2007).
A hybrid microfluidic-vacuum device for direct interfacing with conventional cell
culture methods. BMC Biotechnol. 7, 60.
Connolly, B. A., Rice, J., Feig, L. A. and Buchsbaum, R. J. (2005). Tiam1-IRSp53
complex formation directs specificity of rac-mediated actin cytoskeleton regulation.
Mol. Cell. Biol. 25, 4602-4614.
Cook, T. A., Nagasaki, T. and Gundersen, G. G. (1998). Rho guanosine triphosphatase
mediates the selective stabilization of microtubules induced by lysophosphatidic acid.
J. Cell Biol. 141, 175-185.
Czuchra, A., Wu, X., Meyer, H., van Hengel, J., Schroeder, T., Geffers, R., Rottner,
K. and Brakebusch, C. (2005). Cdc42 is not essential for filopodium formation,
directed migration, cell polarization, and mitosis in fibroblastoid cells. Mol. Biol. Cell
16, 4473-4484.
da Silva, J. S. and Dotti, C. G. (2002). Breaking the neuronal sphere: regulation of the
actin cytoskeleton in neuritogenesis. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 3, 694-704.
Etienne-Manneville, S. and Hall, A. (2002). Rho GTPases in cell biology. Nature 420,
629-635.
Gardiner, E. M., Pestonjamasp, K. N., Bohl, B. P., Chamberlain, C., Hahn, K. M. and
Bokoch, G. M. (2002). Spatial and temporal analysis of Rac activation during live
neutrophil chemotaxis. Curr. Biol. 12, 2029-2034.
Hemsath, L., Dvorsky, R., Fiegen, D., Carlier, M. F. and Ahmadian, M. R.(2005). An
electrostatic steering mechanism of Cdc42 recognition by Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome
proteins. Mol. Cell 20, 313-324.
Hodgson, L., Nalbant, P., Shen, F. and Hahn, K. (2006). Imaging and photobleach
correction of Mero-CBD, sensor of endogenous Cdc42 activation. Methods Enzymol.
406, 140-156.
Hodgson, L., Pertz, O. and Hahn, K. M. (2008). Design and optimization of genetically
encoded fluorescent biosensors: GTPase biosensors. Methods Cell Biol. 85, 63-81.
Hoppe, 
A. D. and Swanson, J. A.(2004). Cdc42, Rac1, and Rac2 display distinct patterns
of activation during phagocytosis. Mol. Biol. Cell 15, 3509-3519.
Itoh, R. E., Kurokawa, K., Ohba, Y., Yoshizaki, H., Mochizuki, N. and Matsuda, M.
(2002). Activation of rac and cdc42 video imaged by fluorescent resonance energy
transfer-based single-molecule probes in the membrane of living cells. Mol. Cell. Biol.
22, 6582-6591.
Kraynov, V . S., Chamberlain, C., Bokoch, G. M., Schwartz, M. A., Slabaugh, S. and
Hahn, K. M. (2000). Localized Rac activation dynamics visualized in living cells.
Science 290, 333-337.
Kurokawa, K., Nakamura, T., Aoki, K. and Matsuda, M. (2005). Mechanism and role
of localized activation of Rho-family GTPases in growth factor-stimulated fibroblasts
and neuronal cells. Biochem. Soc. Trans. 33, 631-634.
Levskaya, A., Weiner, O. D., Lim, W. A. and Voigt, C. A.(2009). Spatiotemporal control
of cell signalling using a light-switchable protein interaction. Nature 461, 997-1001.
Li, Z., Hannigan, M., Mo, Z., Liu, B., Lu, W., Wu, Y., Smrcka, A. V ., Wu, G., Li, L.,
Liu, M. et al. (2003). Directional sensing requires G beta gamma-mediated PAK1 and
PIX alpha-dependent activation of Cdc42. Cell 114, 215-227.
Machacek, M., Hodgson, L., Welch, C., Elliott, H., Nalbant, P., Pertz, O., Abell, A.,
Johnson, G. L., Hahn, K. M. and Danuser, G. (2009). Coordination of Rho GTPase
activities during cell protrusion. Nature 461, 99-103.
Mertens, A. E., Rygiel, T. P., Olivo, C., van der Kammen, R. and Collard, J. G.(2005).
The Rac activator Tiam1 controls tight junction biogenesis in keratinocytes through
binding to and activation of the Par polarity complex.J. Cell Biol. 170, 1029-1037.
Michaelson, D., Silletti, J., Murphy, G., D’Eustachio, P., Rush, M. and Philips, M. R.
(2001). Differential localization of Rho GTPases in live cells: regulation by hypervariable
regions and RhoGDI binding.J. Cell Biol. 152, 111-126.
Moon, S. Y. and Zheng, Y. (2003). Rho GTPase-activating proteins in cell regulation.
Trends Cell Biol. 13, 13-22.
Nakaya, Y., Sukowati, E. W., Wu, Y. and Sheng, G. (2008). RhoA and microtubule
dynamics control cell-basement membrane interaction in EMT during gastrulation. Nat.
Cell Biol. 10, 765-775.
Nalbant, P., Hodgson, L., Kraynov, V ., Toutchkine, A. and Hahn, K. M. (2004).
Activation of endogenous Cdc42 visualized in living cells. Science 305, 1615-1619.
Nimnual, A. S., Taylor, L. J. and Bar-Sagi, D.(2003). Redox-dependent downregulation
of Rho by Rac. Nat. Cell Biol. 5, 236-241.
Obermeier, A., Ahmed, S., Manser, E., Yen, S. C., Hall, C. and Lim, L. (1998). PAK
promotes morphological changes by acting upstream of Rac. EMBO J. 17, 4328-4339.
Palazzo, A. F., Cook, T. A., Alberts, A. S. and Gundersen, G. G.(2001). mDia mediates
Rho-regulated formation and orientation of stable microtubules. Nat. Cell Biol. 3, 723-
729.
Park, T. J., Mitchell, B. J., Abitua, P. B., Kintner, C. and Wallingford, J. B. (2008).
Dishevelled controls apical docking and planar polarization of basal bodies in ciliated
epithelial cells. Nat. Genet. 40, 871-879.
Parsons, M., Monypenny
, J., Ameer-Beg, S. M., Millard, T. H., Machesky, L. M.,
Peter, M., Keppler, M. D., Schiavo, G., Watson, R., Chernoff, J. et al. (2005).
Spatially distinct binding of Cdc42 to PAK1 and N-WASP in breast carcinoma cells.
Mol. Cell. Biol. 25, 1680-1695.
Pegtel, D. M., Ellenbroek, S. I., Mertens, A. E., van der Kammen, R. A., de Rooij, J.
and Collard, J. G. (2007). The Par-Tiam1 complex controls persistent migration by
stabilizing microtubule-dependent front-rear polarity.Curr. Biol. 17, 1623-1634.
1849Spatio-temporal Rho GTPase signaling
Journal of Cell Science
Pertz, O. and Hahn, K. M. (2004). Designing biosensors for Rho family proteins-
deciphering the dynamics of Rho family GTPase activation in living cells. J. Cell Sci.
117, 1313-1318.
Pertz, O., Hodgson, L., Klemke, R. L. and Hahn, K. M. (2006). Spatiotemporal
dynamics of RhoA activity in migrating cells. Nature 440, 1069-1072.
Pertz, O. C., Wang, Y., Yang, F., Wang, W., Gay, L. J., Gristenko, M. A., Clauss, T.
R., Anderson, D. J., Liu, T., Auberry, K. J. et al. (2008). Spatial mapping of the
neurite and soma proteomes reveals a functional Cdc42/Rac regulatory network. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 105, 1931-1936.
Posern, G. and Treisman, R.(2006). Actin’ together: serum response factor, its cofactors
and the link to signal transduction. Trends Cell Biol. 16, 588-596.
Ren, X. D., Kiosses, W. B. and Schwartz, M. A. (1999). Regulation of the small GTP-
binding protein Rho by cell adhesion and the cytoskeleton. EMBO J. 18, 578-585.
Rossman, K. L., Der, C. J. and Sondek, J. (2005). GEF means go: turning on RHO
GTPases with guanine nucleotide-exchange factors. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 6, 167-
180.
Sander, E. E., ten Klooster, J. P., van Delft, S., van der Kammen, R. A. and Collard,
J. G. (1999). Rac downregulates Rho activity: reciprocal balance between both
GTPases determines cellular morphology and migratory behavior. J. Cell Biol. 147,
1009-1022.
Sanz-Moreno, V ., Gadea, G., Ahn, J., Paterson, H., Marra, P., Pinner, S., Sahai, E.
and Marshall, C. J. (2008). Rac activation and inactivation control plasticity of tumor
cell movement. Cell 135, 510-523.
Satoh, T. and Kaziro, Y.(1992). Ras in signal transduction. Semin Cancer Biol. 3, 169-177.
Tsuji, T., Ishizaki, T., Okamoto, M., Higashida, C., Kimura, K., Furuyashiki, T.,
Arakawa, Y., Birge, R. B., Nakamoto, T., Hirai, H. et al. (2002). ROCK and mDia1
antagonize in Rho-dependent Rac activation in Swiss 3T3 fibroblasts.J. Cell Biol. 157,
819-830.
Wheeler, A. P., Wells, C. M., Smith, S. D., Vega, F. M., Henderson, R. B., Tybulewicz,
V . L. and Ridley, A. J.(2006). Rac1 and Rac2 regulate macrophage morphology but
are not essential for migration. J. Cell Sci. 119, 2749-2757.
Wong, K., Pertz, O., Hahn, K. and Bourne, H. (2006). Neutrophil polarization:
spatiotemporal dynamics of RhoA activity support a self-organizing mechanism. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 103, 3639-3644.
Wu, Y. I., Frey, D., Lungu, O. I., Jaehrig, A., Schlichting, I., Kuhlman, B. and Hahn,
K. M. (2009). A genetically encoded photoactivatable Rac controls the motility of
living cells. Nature 461, 104-108.
Yoshizaki, H., Ohba, Y., Kurokawa, K., Itoh, R. E., Nakamura, T., Mochizuki, N.,
Nagashima, K. and Matsuda, M. (2003). Activity of Rho-family GTPases during cell
division as visualized with FRET-based probes. J. Cell Biol. 162, 223-232.
1850 Journal of Cell Science 123 (11)
Commentaries and Cell Science at a Glance
JCS Commentaries highlight and critically discuss recent and exciting findings that will interest those who work
in cell biology, molecular biology, genetics and related disciplines, whereas Cell Science at a Glance poster
articles are short primers that act as an introduction to an area of cell biology, and include a large poster and
accompanying text. 
Both of these article types, designed to appeal to specialists and nonspecialists alike, are commissioned from
leading figures in the field and are subject to rigorous peer-review and in-house editorial appraisal. Each issue
of the journal usually contains at least one of each article type. JCS thus provides readers with more than 50
topical pieces each year, which cover the complete spectrum of cell science. The following are just some of the
areas that will be covered in JCS over the coming months:
Cell Science at a Glance
The nuclear envelope at a glance Kathy Wilson
p53 at a glance Laura Attardi
Rho GTPases and their role in organizing the actin cytoskeleton Ed Manser
Commentaries
Integrating one-dimensional and three-dimensional maps of genomes Job Dekker
Connecting the transcription site to the nuclear pore Françoise Stutz
New insights into the role of mitochondria in aging Christiaan Leeuwenburgh
Although we discourage the submission of unsolicited Commentaries and Cell Science at a Glance poster
articles to the journal, ideas for future articles – in the form of a short proposal and some key references –
are welcome and should be sent by email to the Editorial Office (jcs@biologists.com).
Journal of Cell Science , Bidder Building, 140 Cowley Road, Cambridge CB4 0DL, UK
E-mail: jcs@biologists.com    Website: http://jcs.biologists.org
Journal of Cell Science