ChemiCal Biology of memBranes and signaling CHIMIA 2021, 75, No. 12 1017
doi:10.2533/chimia.2021.1017 Chimia 75 (2021) 1017–1021 © R. Loewith, A. Roux, O. Pertz
*Correspondence: Prof. R. Loewithab, Robbie.Loewith@unige.ch, Dr. A. Rouxac,
Aurélien.Roux@unige.ch, Dr. O. Pertzd, Olivier.Pertz@izb.unibe.ch
aNational Centre for Competence in Research in Chemical Biology;
bDepartment of Molecular Biology, University of Geneva;
cDepartment of Biochemistry, University of Geneva,
dInstitute of Cell Biology, University of Bern
Chemical-Biology-derived in vivo Sensors:
Past, Present, and Future
Robbie Loewith*ab, Aurélien Roux*ac, and Olivier Pertz*d
Abstract: To understand the complex biochemistry and biophysics of biological systems, one needs to be able
to monitor local concentrations of molecules, physical properties of macromolecular assemblies and activation
status of signaling pathways, in real time, within single cells, and at high spatio-temporal resolution. Here we look
at the tools that have been / are being / need to be provided by chemical biology to address these challenges.
In particular, we highlight the utility of molecular probes that help to better measure mechanical forces and flux
through key signalling pathways. Chemical biology can be used to both build biosensors to visualize, but also
actuators to perturb biological processes. An emergent theme is the possibility to multiplex measurements of
multiple cellular processes. Advances in microscopy automation now allow us to acquire datasets for 1000’s of
cells. This produces high dimensional datasets that require computer vision approaches that automate image
analysis. The high dimensionality of these datasets are often not immediately accessible to human intuition, and,
similarly to ‘omics technologies, require statistical approaches for their exploitation. The field of biosensor imag-
ing is therefore experiencing a multidisciplinary transition that will enable it to realize its full potential as a tool to
provide a deeper appreciation of cell physiology.
Keywords: Biophysics · Biosensor · Machine learning · Signaling dynamics · Single cell biology
Robbie Loewith studied biochemistry,
molecular biology and genetics at the
University of Guelph, ON, Canada where
he received his BSc. For his PhD, he
moved to the University of Calgary, AB,
Canada where he studied in the department
of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology,
graduating in 2000. He then moved to
Basel, Switzerland, for post-doctoral work
under the mentorship of Prof. Michael Hall.
During this time he discovered that TOR (Target Of Rapamycin),
a protein kinase that governs cell growth in virtually all eukary-
otes, functions as part of two, distinct, multiprotein complexes. In
2005, still intrigued by TOR signalling, he started his own inde-
pendent group at the University of Geneva where he is now a full
professor in the Department of Molecular Biology and Director
of the National Centre for Competence in Research in Chemical
Biology (NCCR Chemical Biology). While rapamycin-sensitive
TOR Complex 1 (TORC1) is well established to be regulated
downstream of nutrient cues, the Loewith lab, in collaboration
with the Roux lab, recently discovered that rapamycin-insensitive
TORC2 functions in a homeostatic feedback loop to maintain ten-
sile properties of the plasma membrane. Study of this unanticipat-
ed role of TORC2 in mechanotransduction as well as determina-
tion of electron cryo-microscopy structures of the TOR complexes
and their regulators are presently major foci of the Loewith group.
Aurélien Roux studied molecularbiology at
theEcoleNormaleSupérieuredeLyon,France
(BSc2000)andphysicsattheUniversitéParis
6-Denis Diderot, Paris, France (MSc 2001,
PhD 2004). He then moved to Yale for post-
doctoralwork underthe mentorshipof Pietro
De Camilli. In 2007 he returned to Europe,
first to the Institut Curie, Paris, France as a
CNRS staff scientistand then, in 2010, to the
University of Geneva where he is now a full
professorin the departmentof Biochemistry. His lab aims to under-
stand how the unique physical properties of lipid membranes and
epitheliarespectively contribute to membranetraffic and organogen-
esis.Tothese ends, they employ in vitro modelsto measurerelevant
physical parameters,such as forces, rigidity, tension, and diffusion
constants, and in vivo biosensors to probe how membrane tension
effects cellular signaling and membrane trafficking.
Olivier Pertz studied biology at the
University of Lausanne and then biophysics
at the University of Basel where he received
his PhD in 1999. For his post-doctoral work
he moved to the Scripps Research Institute,
CA, USA, and in 2004 he became a Staff
Scientist at the University of California
San Diego, CA, USA. He then returned
to the University of Basel as an Assistant
professor in 2015 and since 2016 he is an
Associate professor at the University of Bern in the Institute of
Cell biology. His lab studies the spatio-temporal aspects of signal-
ing events that regulate Cell Morphogenesis and Fate Decisions
using novel quantitative approaches to measure/manipulate sig-
naling dynamics at biologically relevant time/length scales.
Brief Introduction
The study of molecular cell biology has been aided tremen-
dously by the development of chemical tools that label cellu-

1018 CHIMIA 2021, 75, No. 12 ChemiCal Biology of memBranes and signaling
Sensing of Molecular Crowding
A good example of the sensing of a physical property is the
sensing of molecular crowding. The past few years have seen an
increasing appreciation for the importance of molecular crowd-
ing in a variety of cellular processes ranging from controlling the
kinetics of biochemical reactions to regulating flux and dispersion
of information.[14] Specifically, formation of membraneless or-
ganelles by liquid–liquid phase separation (LLPS) is now realized
to be a ubiquitous process to organize cellular content. LLPS is a
dynamic process wherein proteins or nucleic acids self-assemble
into amorphous structures that locally alter diffusion properties.
LLPS of a given protein is relatively easy to follow with fluores-
cent tags although the fluorescent properties of these tags may
be altered upon entry into the condensed state (where pH and
physical proximity of fluorophores may lead to signal quenching)
making quantitation challenging. LLPS of nucleic acids can be
followed via a number of approaches including bisbenzimide dyes
whose UV-induced fluorescence increases 30-fold upon binding
to nucleic acid. Various fluorescence in situ hybridization tech-
niques also exist. RNAs can also be detected in vivo by inserting
sequences that are specifically recognized by RNA-binding pro-
teins which themselves can be fluorescently labelled.
LLPS is triggered by several factors including REDOX,
pH, temperature, and, of course, cytoplasmic concentration.
Cytoplasmic concentration or viscosity was recently shown
to be regulated downstream of Target Of Rapamycin (TOR)
signaling.[15] To measure cytoplasmic viscosity, the authors used
microrheology. Specifically, they expressed genetically encoded
multimeric nanoparticles in cells and by single-molecule tracking
using time-lapse fluorescence microscopy imaging, determined
diffusion coefficients and derived the viscosity of the cytoplasm.
By altering cytoplasmic crowding TOR could influence the LLPS
of multiple factors. Intriguingly, cytoplasmic dynamics can also
be manipulated experimentally. Focused-light-induced cytoplas-
mic streaming (FLUCS) uses a laser to induce hydrodynamic
flows within the cytosplasm.[16] With this technique, one can probe
the functions of cytoplasmic flows and the material properties of
structures such as centrosomes. The combination of FLUCS with
microrheology and LLPS detection promises to yield exciting in-
sights into the function of phase separation of specific factors.
Sensing of Membrane Tension
Lipid membranes have unique biophysical properties impor-
tant for cell viability and dissecting how these various properties
contribute to diverse cell functions has also become an important
focus in cell biology. Lipid membranes are 2D fluids which can be
deformed through stretching, causing tension, bending, causing
curvature, and shearing, causing viscous flows. Thus, measuring
tension, curvature and viscosity of lipid membranes is gaining
increasing interest in cell biology. Owing to their hydrophobic-
ity, lipid membranes are easy targets for appropriately-designed
chemical compounds. Indeed, chemical biology approaches have
provided new tools for measuring these properties. A good ex-
ample is the ability to assess lipid order, the property of lipids to
form domains of different phases, thereby segregating membrane
components.[17] Lipid order changes the hydration of lipids, which
is then reported by shifts in the fluorescence emission spectra of
Laurdan, a simple fluorescent molecule, and one of the first ex-
amples of a chemical probe sensitive to membrane biophysical
properties. These molecules are solvatochromic push-pull probes,
meaning that they have one electron-donor group, and one elec-
tron-receptor group. The efficiency of the electron transfer be-
tween the two groups affects fluorescence spectra, and depends
on the solvation state of the molecule.[18]
More complex molecules are required to measure other bio-
physicalparameters.Molecularrotors,whichrotatewithBrownian
motion, can locally probe the mobility of molecules within the
lar factors and/or alter their activities. Indeed, from vital stains
and radio-labelled metabolites, to small-molecule agonists, an-
tagonists and active-site and allosteric inhibitors, cell biology is
built on the development of reagents with designed properties to
measure and perturb activities of biomolecules with high spatio-
temporal resolution. These chemistry-backed advances are often
developed hand-in-hand with molecular biology tools, a classic
example being the ‘magic bullet for kinases’ – the engineering
of the ‘gatekeeper’ residue in the catalytic pocket as a generic
approach to inhibit the enzymatic activity of virtually any protein
kinase of interest.[1] Subsequent examples include the genera-
tion of genetically-encoded, self-labeling protein tags such as the
Halo, SNAP and CLIP tags,[2] and rapamycin-based protein di-
merization systems such as the anchor-away,[3] or knock-sideways
systems.[4] Optogenetics[5] represents an important variation on
this chemical biology theme wherein cellular activities are ma-
nipulated by light rather than small molecules. Speaking of light,
combining the now rich palette of fluorescent and bioluminescent
proteins with fluorescent dyes incorporated onto self-labeling
proteins offers opportunities to manipulate and monitor multiple
processes simultaneously.
Figuratively and literally, the future looks bright. So what are
the next challenges? As outlined below, many areas of cell biol-
ogy are just now starting to benefit from the amazing power of
chemical biology, while other areas still await the design of clever
tools. We briefly review currently-available, state-of-the-art tech-
nologies, and provide some examples of how these tools have
revolutionized our understanding of biology. Biosensor imaging
now allows spectral multiplexing and is compatible with high-
throughput imaging. This now produces high dimensional datas-
ets analogous to ‘omics methods. We discuss emerging computer
vision approaches to analyze these large imaging datasets, and
some of the statistical approaches to make sense of these complex
data. By presenting recent innovative solutions, we hope that this
review will inspire development of new tools to address currently
difficult-to-access cell biology phenomena.
What Can Be Sensed?
There is now an incredible diversity of biosensors available
and we make no attempt here to be comprehensive – rather, we
begin with examples that typify what can be sensed and, by infer-
ence, what should be possible to sense in the near future.
Sensing of Ions and Metabolites
An early example of the power of biosensors was the devel-
opment of Ca2+-sensitive dyes and genetically encoded calcium
indicators. These tools have produced incredible images of Ca2+
‘puffs’ and ‘sparks’[6] in real-time with sub-micron resolution,
and, combined with state-of-the-art microscopy techniques, have
been used to monitor nerve firing in deep tissues.[7] The latest
variations include development of pH-correctable Ca2+ sensors
that enable accurate Ca2+ measurements in acidic organelles.[8]
Ca2+ sensing is reviewed extensively in the literature and not
discussed further here; rather it serves as a high-water mark for
what biosensors can achieve. Indeed, the remarkable successes
in sensing Ca2+ inspired the creation of sensors of chloride,[9]
Cu+[10] as well as important metabolites such as cAMP[11] and
nicotinamide adenine dinucleotides. [12] Other analyte sensors
are sure to follow.[13]
Going beyond Sensing of Analytes
Ion flux and metabolic conversions are clearly essential to life,
but biological phenomena are also constrained by physics.
Although biochemical determinations are relatively accessi-
ble, assessing biophysical properties of cells continues to be much
more challenging and represents an area where biosensors begin
to have tremendous impact.
ChemiCal Biology of memBranes and signaling CHIMIA 2021, 75, No. 12 1019
present challenge is to understand how the feedback circuitry of
signaling networks can produce rich sets of dynamic signaling
behaviours. This is particularly important as corruption of the
signaling flux through these pathways typically leads to grave
diseases including metabolic syndrome and cancer. Biosensor
imaging now provides a handle to study these signaling dynamics
at the single cell level, at relevant time and length scales, in native
and pathophysiological states.
A prime example of how biosensor imaging has revolution-
ized our understanding of the dynamic behaviour of a signaling
pathway is the MAPK/ERK (Mitogen-activated protein kinase/
Extracellular signal-regulated kinase) pathway. The importance
of ERK dynamics was initially hinted at by biochemical observa-
tions that different growth factors induce different ERK dynam-
ics to control fates such as proliferation and differentiation.[24]
Since then, measurements of single-cell ERK dynamics using
biosensors have revealed that a rich set of dynamic ERK activ-
ity patterns can emerge in different cell systems. These include
transient, sustained, pulsatile and oscillatory ERK dynamics.[25]
Heterogeneous signaling behaviours are typically observed with-
in different cells of the population. These have been averaged out
during classic population-average biochemical assays. At the cell
population scale, collective behaviours such as waves of ERK
pulses can be observed in epithelia during wound healing[26] or
apoptotic cell extrusion.[27] The biosensor technology has there-
fore unveiled several complex behaviours that redefines the cur-
rent MAPK signaling paradigms that have emerged using mostly
classic biochemical approaches. Understanding this complex bi-
ology will require the complete arsenal of chemical biology-based
biosensors and actuators to systematically measure and perturb
different nodes of the MAPK network. These quantitative data
will inform mathematical models to provide a true quantitative
view of this pathway. Similar results are emerging for other sig-
naling pathways.
Which chemical biology biosensors and actuators need to be
built, and how can they be used to study a signaling network of
choice? On one hand, we will need a large palette of biosensors
to measure the dynamics of signal flux through multiple signal-
ing nodes in response to standardized inputs. Chemical biology
can provide the spectral flexibility to perform multiplexed mea-
surements of multiple signaling activities simultaneously. For
example, outside of the context of MAPK biology, simultaneous
single-cell measurements of RhoA and Cdc42 GTPase activities
were made possible by a combination of a genetically-encoded
fluorescence resonance energy transfer-based reporter together
with a cyanine-labeled domain-based biosensor.[28] The realiza-
tion that signaling networks fluctuate on timescales of minutes or
seconds means that we need to rethink our traditional perturbation
toolkit (drug, RNA interference, gene editing, etc.), as such long-
term perturbations often lead to complete rewiring of the signaling
system. Thus, true understanding of these temporal processes re-
quires not only the ability to measure but also the ability to perturb
them at these specific timescales. For example, temporally vary-
ing the signaling input, using microfluidics technology to chal-
lenge cells with growth factor pulses of varying concentration,
duration or frequency, and systematically measuring the signaling
output, coupled with mathematical modelling, has greatly refined
our understanding of the MAPK network circuitry.[25b] Similar ap-
proaches using a combination of signaling optogenetics and bio-
sensor imaging have provided higher throughput for measuring
such signaling input-output responses.[29] The existence of opto-
genetic actuators that can activate ERK at different levels within
the MAPK network, e.g. RAS,[30] RAF,[31] or MEK,[32] provides
opportunity to systematically map the flow of signaling in this
cascade. Here again, a chemical biology approach can produce
flexible perturbation tools, such as actuators or rapamycin-based
knocksideways approaches, that can allow one to systematically
membrane, and are thus excellent reporters of membrane viscos-
ity (or fluidity).[19] In this case, the electron transfer between the
fluorophore and the rest of the molecule depends on the speed at
which the fluorophore rotates, which depends, in turn, on viscos-
ity. Many fluorescent molecules can be used as molecular rotors,
and, in many cases, the electron-transfer affects the fluorescence
lifetime, which provides a useful way to do fluorescence measure-
ments independent of the dye concentration.
Recently, molecular rotors have been proposed to report mem-
brane tension, the surface force opposing membrane extension.[19]
But the most prominent advance in measuring membrane tension
with fluorescent dyes has been made with the design of flipper
molecules.[20] Flippers are also push-pull probes, with electron
transfer also affecting fluorescence lifetime. But instead of rotat-
ing, two planar fluorophores linked through a single carbon bond
are kept out of planar alignment through electrostatic repulsion
between additional groups. Mechanical pressure exerted by sur-
rounding molecules – e.g. lipid acyl chains – can planarize the
two fluorophores. Thus, flippers are real mechano-sensing mole-
cules, directly reporting the pressure on their chemical structures.
As membrane tension varies the pressure exerted on lipid acyl
chains, flippers inserted in artificial and cellular membranes can
report changes of tension through changes of their fluorescent
lifetime.[21] However, for both rotors and flippers, fluorescence
properties are strongly affected by lipid composition, lipid order,
and phase segregation state of the membrane being probed.
It remains a challenge to measure membrane curvature with
fluorescent membrane dyes. One feature of curvature that could
be exploited for curvature sensing is the opposite tensions in the
two leaflets of the curved membrane, one being stretched, the
other one being compressed. However, as the sum of expected
tension changes from both leaflets is null, curvature sensing
would require leaflet-specific dye targeting. Also, curvature oc-
curs on length scales much larger than the lipid/molecule size,
which makes single lipids insensitive to curvature,[22] but larger
lipid domains, forming close to a demixing point, are sensitive
to curvature.
Sensing of Cytoskeletal Forces
Beyond membrane tension, forces exerted by the cytoskeleton
are also of strong interest to cell biologists. Chemical Biology
tools that could measure forces along actin or microtubule fila-
ment lengths, or at their tips, would be extremely useful to help
follow, for example, the force fields acting in lamellipodia of
migrating cells, during the formation and the separation of the
mitotic spindle, or during constriction of the contractile ring of
the cleavage furrow during cytokinesis. One could imagine visu-
alizing force fields in large cytoskeletal structures, and correlating
this to the force fields with cell movements, or cell shape chang-
es. One strategy could be to exploit chemical groups of natural
products that specifically target filamentous forms of cytoskel-
etal proteins, such as jasplakinolide for actin-F, or taxol for tubu-
lin. Linking two protomers with a biomechanical sensing spacer
could report forces applied to neighbouring subunits within the
filament structure. This could be a folded FRET reporter that un-
folds upon stretch, or, a series of fluorophores and quenchers that
change fluorescence upon compression. This would extend new
possibilities to the field of mechanobiology, both at the single cell
level, and at the tissue level.
Sensing of Signaling Pathways
Cells have developed highly specialized signaling networks to
translate external (chemokines, mechanical cues, etc.) and inter-
nal (metabolic state, mechanical state, etc.) inputs into signaling
outputs that specify fate decisions such as proliferation, death,
survival or motility. An emerging picture is that signaling dynam-
ics rather than static steady states regulate fate decisions.[23] The
1020 CHIMIA 2021, 75, No. 12 ChemiCal Biology of memBranes and signaling
These image analysis pipelines provide the opportunity to ex-
tract the signaling time-series within thousands of single cells (or
at specific subcellular locations within single cells). Very often,
averages of the intrinsically heterogeneous signaling activities
within a population are still computed to generate initial intuition
about signaling networks. The caveat of this approach however is
that it does not resolve subtle signaling patterns that arise due to
extrinsic or intrinsic noise within biochemical pathways – essen-
tial information when dissecting such signaling pathways. While
bioinformatics pipelines to analyze single-cell RNAseq data are
now mainstream, such pipelines are just emerging in the field of
single-cell biosensor time-series. One approach to mine signal-
ing trajectories datasets requires initial human evaluation of the
signaling trajectories and crafting of human-intuitive features that
captures properties from the signaling time-series (Fig. 1). For ex-
ample, in a dataset of pulsatile ERK activity, this could capture the
amplitude, the width, and frequency of ERK pulses.[38] Plotting
these features can then provide intuition regarding the different fi-
nite signaling states within cells of a population. However, having
to browse through many single-cell trajectories, in response to dif-
ferent perturbations, can quickly prove overwhelming to human
intuition. A complementary, purely data-driven approach there-
fore consists of using convolutional neuronal networks (CNN)
to identify patterns in signaling time-series in different perturbed
states (Fig. 1).[39] This approach can then identify prototype sig-
naling trajectories that capture the most discriminative features
relevant to a signaling state, which are often different than the
population average. Another advantage of this approach is that it
allows to project the signaling trajectories in a low dimensional
space that provides intuition about the heterogeneity and similar-
ity of different single-cell signaling states in response to different
perturbations. This provides a new way to interact with high di-
mensional datasets signaling time-series enabling intuitive explo-
ration of large datasets and thus hypotheses about the underlying
biology. This approach has revealed the existence of a variety of
ERK/AKT single-cell activity dynamics in response to a large
variety of growth factors that signal through different receptor ty-
rosine kinases.[39] These examples showcase how scalable chemi-
cal biology-based biosensor and actuators, when interfaced with
perturb signaling at relevant timescales. The fact that some of
these chemical biology tools are ‘dark’, e.g. rapamycin-based
systems, nicely complement multiplexed measurements/pertur-
bations of fluorescence/optogenetics-based biosensors/actuator
systems. Automation of the application of perturbations can be
performed using microfluidic platforms that can be programmed
to perform many experiments simultaneously or sequentially.[33]
Integration of chemical biology techniques with programmable
microfluidics and automated imaging therefore can provide the
ability to comprehensively perturb and measure biological sys-
tems at relevant time and length scales.
Challenges Inherent to Large Biosensor Image
Datasets
The approaches mentioned above, when combined with auto-
mated microscopy, now provide the opportunity to image thou-
sands of single cells in different perturbed states. This yields
large datasets of similar or even larger complexity and size than
sequencing-based bioinformatics. The emergent challenge now
becomes the ability to effectively exploit these data. Many open-
source image analysis platforms have recently emerged to tackle
this issue. This includes packages such as Fiji,[34] CellProfiler,[35]
and Ilastik[36] to cite a few. Among many other tasks, these pipe-
lines can perform segmentation and tracking of objects that al-
lows for extraction of single-cell time-series. Machine learning
approaches, based on user-annotated datasets, can segment spe-
cific regions of interest (ROIs) directly on images (for example
nuclei). This bypasses classic ‘threshold’-based segmentation ap-
proaches that typically do not perform well in low signal to noise
images. In a setting in which a high volume of images must be
analyzed, intensive computational resources might be required. A
solution to this need is the usage of cloud-based computational
resources such as Google Colab (https://colab.research.google.
com). ZeroCostDL4MIC, for example, provides a framework to
perform different deep learning-based image analysis tasks di-
rectly on Google Colab, without extensive need for programming
expertise.[37] This rapidly evolving portfolio of computational re-
sources provides a low barrier access to image analysis accessible
to people with little programming experience.
Time [min]
Signaling activity
...
CNN
featuresConvolutional
layer
OUTPUT
classification
...
Projection in al ow
dimensionals pace
Prototype
trajectories
per class
Human-craftedf eature based
approach
Data driven machine learning approach xTSNE
yTSNE
Time [min]
Signaling
activity
peak amplitude
peak width
peak frequency
Class 1C lass 2C lass 3
Time [min]
Signaling activity
Time [min]
Signaling activity
Computer visionp ipeline Single-cell
trajectories
Single-cell
trajectories
Fig. 1. Typical analysis pipeline for biosensor time-series datasets. Upper left panel. Images acquired using automated time-lapse microscopy are
analyzed using a combination of image analysis pipelines, and yield large volumes of time-series datasets. One approach (upper right panel) in-
volves human inspection of the time-series and formulation of a number of features that might capture different properties of the time-series. An ad-
vantage of this approach is that it is directly interpretable by human intuition. Another approach (lower panel) involves classiﬁcation of time-series in
response to different perturbations using convolutional neural networks (CNN). This produces a latent space of CNN features that can be projected
in a low dimensional space that provides intuition about different classes (e.g. dynamic signaling behaviours). This can be used to extract prototype
signaling trajectories relevant to a perturbation. This approach provides hypotheses about signaling behaviours, and is amenable to large datasets.
ChemiCal Biology of memBranes and signaling CHIMIA 2021, 75, No. 12 1021
modern imaging, image and statistical analysis pipelines, will be
able to comprehensively explore signaling networks.
Conclusions
Chemical Biology has made huge advances in enabling sci-
entists to monitor critical biochemical parameters in vivo and in
real time. Excitingly, next generation biosensors are now coming
online to monitor critical biophysical parameters, although the
need for new tools in this domain remains. The ability to perform
multiplexed measurements in response to perturbations applied at
adequate time and length scales have the potential to highly en-
hance our understanding of cellular processes. Biosensor imaging
produces increasingly complex high dimensional datasets as com-
plex as those obtained with ‘omics approaches. Computational
methods are now also being produced for such kinds of datasets.
The analysis of these cellular processes, at adequate spatial and
temporal scales, and at scale will provide the quantitative data
for a more exhaustive understanding of cellular processes, which
are also amenable to mathematical modelling. The future will see
probes that work in tissues, organs and even individuals.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by grants from the Swiss National Science
Foundation (RL, OP, AR), the NCCR Chemical Biology (RL, AR),
Human Frontier Science Program (OP), and the Swiss Cancer League
(OP). We are grateful to Coralie Dessauges for help producing Fig. 1.
Received: October 27, 2021
[1] A. C. Bishop, O. Buzko, K. M. Shokat, Trends Cell Biol. 2001, 11, 167.
[2] J. Wilhelm, S. Kuhn, M. Tarnawski, G. Gotthard, J. Tunnermann, T.Tanzer, J.
Karpenko, N. Mertes, L. Xue, U. Uhrig, J. Reinstein, J. Hiblot, K. Johnsson,
Biochemistry 2021, 60, 2560, https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.biochem.1c00258.
[3] H. Haruki, J. Nishikawa, U. K. Laemmli, Mol. Cell 2008, 31, 925,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2008.07.020.
[4] M. S. Robinson, D. A. Sahlender, S. D. Foster, Dev. Cell 2010, 18, 324,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.devcel.2009.12.015.
[5] C. P. O’Banion, D. S. Lawrence, ChemBioChem 2018, 19, 1201,
https://doi.org/10.1002/cbic.201800013.
[6] https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7LyZkNeyw9s.
[7] W. Yang, R. Yuste, Nat. Methods 2017, 14, 349,
https://doi.org/10.1038/nmeth.4230.
[8] N. Narayanaswamy, K. Chakraborty, A. Saminathan, E. Zeichner,
K. Leung, J. Devany, Y. Krishnan, Nat. Methods 2019, 16, 95,
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41592-018-0232-7.
[9] M. Zajac, K. Chakraborty, S. Saha, V. Mahadevan, D. T.
Infield, A. Accardi, Z. Qiu, Y. Krishnan, J. Cell Sci. 2020, 133,
https://doi.org/10.1242/jcs.240390.
[10] M. Priessner, P. A. Summers, B. W. Lewis, M. Sastre, L. Ying, M.
K. Kuimova, R. Vilar, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2021, 60, 23148,
https://doi.org/10.1002/anie.202109349.
[11] N. Kim, S. Shin, S. W. Bae, Biosensors 2021, 11,
https://doi.org/10.3390/bios11020039.
[12] O. Sallin, L. Reymond, C. Gondrand, F. Raith, B. Koch, K. Johnsson, eLife
2018, 7, https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.32638.
[13] J. A. Kaczmarski, J. A. Mitchell, M. A. Spence, V. Vongsouthi,
C. J. Jackson, Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 2019, 57, 31,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sbi.2019.01.013.
[14] M. Hondele, S. Heinrich, P.De Los Rios, K. Weis, Emer. Top. Life Sci. 2020,
4, 331, https://doi.org/10.1042/ETLS20190190.
[15] M. Delarue, G. P. Brittingham, S. Pfeffer, I. V. Surovtsev, S. Pinglay, K. J.
Kennedy, M. Schaffer, J. I. Gutierrez, D. Sang, G. Poterewicz, J. K. Chung,
J. M. Plitzko, J. T. Groves, C. Jacobs-Wagner, B. D. Engel, L. J. Holt, Cell
2018, 174, 338, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2018.05.042.
[16] a) M. Mittasch, P. Gross, M. Nestler, A. W. Fritsch, C. Iserman, M. Kar,
M. Munder, A. Voigt, S. Alberti, S. W. Grill, M. Kreysing, Nat. Cell
Biol. 2018, 20, 344, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41556-017-0032-9; b) M.
Mittasch, V. M. Tran, M. U. Rios, A. W. Fritsch, S. J. Enos, B. Ferreira
Gomes, A. Bond, M. Kreysing, J. B. Woodruff, J. Cell Biol. 2020, 219,
https://doi.org/10.1083/jcb.201912036.
[17] A. S. Klymchenko, Acc. Chem. Res. 2017, 50, 366,
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.accounts.6b00517.
[18] Y. Niko, A. S. Klymchenko, J. Biochem. 2021, 170, 163,
https://doi.org/10.1093/jb/mvab078.
[19] M. Paez-Perez, I. Lopez-Duarte, A. Vysniauskas, N. J. Brooks, M. K.
Kuimova, Chem. Sci. 2020, 12, 2604, https://doi.org/10.1039/d0sc05874b.
[20] a) M. Dal Molin, Q. Verolet, A. Colom, R. Letrun, E. Derivery, M. Gonzalez-
Gaitan, E. Vauthey, A. Roux, N. Sakai, S. Matile, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2015,
137, 568, https://doi.org/10.1021/ja5107018; b) L. Assies, J. García-Calvo,
F. Piazzolla, S. Sanchez, T. Kato, L. Reymond, A. Goujon, A. Colom, J.
López-Andarias, K. Straková, D. Mahecic, V.Mercier, M. Riggi, N. Jiménez-
Rojo, C. Roffay, G. Licari, M. Tsemperouli, F. Neuhaus, A. Fürstenberg,
E. Vauthey, S. Hoogendoorn, M. Gonzalez-Gaitan, A. Zumbuehl, K.
Sugihara, J. Gruenberg, H. Riezman, R. Loewith, S. Manley, A. Roux,
N. Winssinger, N. Sakai, S. Pitsch, S. Matile, CHIMIA 2021, 75, 1004,
https://doi.org/10.2533/chimia.2021.1004.
[21] A. Colom, E. Derivery, S. Soleimanpour, C. Tomba, M. Dal Molin, N.
Sakai, M. González-Gaitán, S. Matile, A. Roux, Nat. Chem. 2018, in press,
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41557-018-0127-3.
[22] B. Sorre, PhD Thesis, 2010, http://www.theses.fr/2010PA077021.
[23] J. E. Purvis, G. Lahav, Cell 2013, 152, 945,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2013.02.005.
[24] R. Avraham, Y. Yarden, Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 2011, 12, 104,
https://doi.org/10.1038/nrm3048.
[25] a) J. G. Albeck, G. B. Mills, J. S. Brugge, Mol. Cell 2013, 49, 249,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2012.11.002; b) Y. Blum, J. Mikelson, M.
Dobrzynski, H. Ryu, M. A. Jacques, N. L. Jeon, M. Khammash, O. Pertz,
Mol. Syst. Biol. 2019, 15, e8947, https://doi.org/10.15252/msb.20198947.
[26] N. Hino, L. Rossetti, A. Marin-Llaurado, K. Aoki, X.
Trepat, M. Matsuda, T. Hirashima, Dev. Cell 2020, 53, 646,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.devcel.2020.05.011.
[27] P. A. Gagliardi, M. Dobrzynski, M. A. Jacques, C. Dessauges, P. Ender,
Y. Blum, R. M. Hughes, A. R. Cohen, O. Pertz, Dev. Cell 2021, 56, 1712,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.devcel.2021.05.007.
[28] M. Machacek, L. Hodgson, C. Welch, H. Elliott, O. Pertz, P. Nalbant, A.
Abell, G. L. Johnson, K. M. Hahn, G. Danuser, Nature 2009, 461, 99,
https://doi.org/10.1038/nature08242.
[29] C. Dessauges, J. Mikelson, M. Dobrzynski, M.-A. Jacques, A.
Frismantiene, P. A. Gagliardi, M. Khammash, O. Pertz, bioRxiv 2021,
https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.07.27.453955.
[30] M. Z. Wilson, P. T. Ravindran, W. A. Lim, J. E. Toettcher, Mol. Cell 2017,
67, 757, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2017.07.016.
[31] K. Aoki, Y. Kumagai, A. Sakurai, N. Komatsu, Y. Fujita,
C. Shionyu, M. Matsuda, Mol. Cell 2013, 52, 529,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2013.09.015.
[32] A. L. Patel, E. Yeung, S. E. McGuire, A. Y. Wu, J. E. Toettcher, R. D.
Burdine, S. Y. Shvartsman, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2019, 116, 25756,
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1912320116.
[33] S. Tay, J. J. Hughey, T. K. Lee, T. Lipniacki, S. R. Quake, M. W. Covert,
Nature 2010, 466, 267, https://doi.org/10.1038/nature09145.
[34] J. Schindelin, I. Arganda-Carreras, E. Frise, V. Kaynig, M. Longair, T.
Pietzsch, S. Preibisch, C. Rueden, S. Saalfeld, B. Schmid, J. Y. Tinevez, D.
J. White, V.Hartenstein, K. Eliceiri, P.Tomancak, A. Cardona, Nat. Methods
2012, 9, 676, https://doi.org/10.1038/nmeth.2019.
[35] L. Kamentsky,T.R. Jones, A. Fraser, M. A. Bray, D. J. Logan, K. L. Madden,
V. Ljosa, C. Rueden, K. W. Eliceiri, A. E. Carpenter, Bioinformatics 2011,
27, 1179, https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btr095.
[36] S. Berg, D. Kutra, T. Kroeger, C. N. Straehle, B. X. Kausler, C.
Haubold, M. Schiegg, J. Ales, T. Beier, M. Rudy, K. Eren, J. I.
Cervantes, B. Xu, F. Beuttenmueller, A. Wolny, C. Zhang, U.
Koethe, F. A. Hamprecht, A. Kreshuk, Nat. Methods 2019, 16, 1226,
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41592-019-0582-9.
[37] L. von Chamier, R. F. Laine, J. Jukkala, C. Spahn, D. Krentzel, E. Nehme,
M. Lerche, S. Hernandez-Perez, P. K. Mattila, E. Karinou, S. Holden, A.
C. Solak, A. Krull, T. O. Buchholz, M. L. Jones, L. A. Royer, C. Leterrier,
Y. Shechtman, F. Jug, M. Heilemann, G. Jacquemet, R. Henriques, Nat.
Commun. 2021, 12, 2276, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-22518-0.
[38] T. E. Gillies, M. Pargett, M. Minguet, A. E. Davies, J. G. Albeck, Cell Syst.
2017, 5, 549, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cels.2017.10.019.
[39] M. A. Jacques, M. Dobrzynski, P.A. Gagliardi, R. Sznitman, O. Pertz, Mol.
Syst. Biol. 2021, 17, e10026, https://doi.org/10.15252/msb.202010026.
License and Terms
This is an Open Access article under the
terms of the Creative Commons Attribution
License CC BY 4.0. The material may not
be used for commercial purposes.
The license is subject to the CHIMIA terms and conditions: (http://
chimia.ch/component/sppagebuilder/?view=page&id=12).
The definitive version of this article is the electronic one that can be
found at https://doi.org/10.2533/chimia.2021.1017
