RESEARCH Open Access
Spatial proteomic and phospho-proteomic
organization in three prototypical cell migration
modes
Georgios Fengos1, Alexander Schmidt2, Katrin Martin3, Erika Fluri3, Ruedi Aebersold4,5, Dagmar Iber1*
and Olivier Pertz3*
Abstract
Background: Tight spatio-temporal signaling of cytoskeletal and adhesion dynamics is required for localized
membrane protrusion that drives directed cell migration. Different ensembles of proteins are therefore likely to get
recruited and phosphorylated in membrane protrusions in response to specific cues.
Results: Here, we use an assay that allows to biochemically purify extending protrusions of cells migrating in
response to three prototypical receptors: integrins, recepor tyrosine kinases and G-coupled protein receptors. Using
quantitative proteomics and phospho-proteomics approaches, we provide evidence for the existence of cue-
specific, spatially distinct protein networks in the different cell migration modes.
Conclusions: The integrated analysis of the large-scale experimental data with protein information from databases
allows us to understand some emergent properties of spatial regulation of signaling during cell migration. This
provides the cell migration community with a large-scale view of the distribution of proteins and phospho-proteins
regulating directed cell migration.
Keywords: Fibroblast, Directional cell migration, Signaling, Proteomics, Phosphorylation
Background
Recent advances in biomedical research have increased the
throughput of data generation for the characterization of
biological systems and their functions in terms of the pro-
teins that are involved. Although the whole proteome of an
organism reflects the full set of proteins encoded in a given
genome, not all of these proteins coexist at all times and at
equal levels. Cell protein abundance varies according to
different physiological or pathological conditions [1,2].
Thus the protein levels at a given instance reflect the dy-
namics of gene regulation. Identification and quantification
of protein levels under different conditions should there-
fore help constructing a comprehensive database of protein
sets leading to possible biological outcomes/functions.
Additional information of thepost-translational modifica-
tions of these proteins in terms of phosphorylation is
required to provide a specific signaling context to the role
of identified proteins [3]. Network information about pro-
tein signaling interactions combined with the experimen-
tally measured data enables the identification of protein
ensembles that regulate a specific function. In this study,
the function that is under focus is cell migration as a re-
sponse to different molecular stimuli.
Directed migration is a result of the ability of cells to
sense shallow differences in the concentration of a chem-
ical cue and translate them into a steep signaling response
which orients the polarity of the cell [4,5]. Morphologic-
ally, cells respond by polymerizing actin to deform the
membrane, enabling to extend local protrusions, which
are stabilized through adhesive contacts with the extracel-
lular matrix towards the attractive stimulus [6,7]. This
membrane protrusion process also depends on micro-
tubule dynamics [8], as well as membrane trafficking [9],
allowing regulation of membrane remodelling. Because di-
rected membrane protrusion necessitates exquisite cross-
talk between actin, adhesion, microtubule and trafficking
* Correspondence:dagmar.iber@bsse.ethz.ch; olivier.pertz@unibas.ch
1ETH Zurich, D-BSSE, Mattenstrasse 26, CH-4058 Basel, Switzerland
3Department Biomedicine, University of Basel, Mattenstrasse 28, CH-4058
Basel, Switzerland
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article
© 2014 Fengos et al.; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly credited. The Creative Commons Public Domain
Dedication waiver (http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) applies to the data made available in this article,
unless otherwise stated.
Fengos et al. Proteome Science2014, 12:23
http://www.proteomesci.com/content/12/1/23
dynamics, it is reasonable to assume that this process in-
volves precise spatio-temporal regulation of whole signal-
ing networks. This hypothesis prompted us to compare
the pool of proteins of the protrusion with the pool of
proteins from the cell-body (Figure 1A). By coupling
assays, that allow the biochemical purification of pseu-
dopods and cell-body of migrating cells, with quantitative
proteomics approaches, a highly polarized distribution
of specific proteins were observed in pseudopod and
cell-body fractions [10]. Similar results have also been
observed upon proteomic analysis of purified neurite
and soma fractions of differentiating neuronal-like cells
[11]. By providing comprehensive lists of proteins that
localize to specific subcellular compartments, these ap-
proaches allow for an integrated view of spatio-temporal
signaling networks that underlie cell migration and neur-
onal differentiation.
While we know a lot about the signaling events that
regulate cytoskeletal and adhesion dynamics during cell
migration, one current problem is that this knowledge
results from a large variety of different experimental sys-
tems, making it difficult to pinpoint context-dependent
signaling networks inherent to different cell migration
modalities. Cells can migrate in response to different
extracellular stimuli, whose asymmetric distribution pro-
vides directionality. Migration in response to gradients
of immobilized extracellular matrix (ECM) components,
also called haptotaxis, is thought to involve mechano-
sensing through adhesion molecules called integrins
[12]. Migration in response to gradients of soluble che-
mokines, also called chemotaxis, involves growth factor
receptors, which will, in turn, modulate integrin adhe-
sion dynamics to orient the directed cell migration
process. Different receptor systems, such as receptor
tyrosine kinase (RTK) and G-coupled protein receptors
(GPCR), are able to sense distinct chemokines to induce
polarized cell migration. Due to the distinct signaling
programs that both receptors are known to activate, dif-
ferent signaling networks are likely to be recruited to the
leading edge in response to distinct cues that activate
each receptor system. From an experimental perspective,
it is noteworthy to mention that when these cues are ap-
plied homogeneously to cells, random migration occurs.
Random cell migration occurring on homogeneous ECM
is then termed haptokinesis, while bulk growth factor
stimulation leads to chemokinesis.
Here we compare proteomes and phospho-proteomes
of pseudopod and cell-body of NIH 3 T3 fibroblasts that
directionally migrate in response to three prototypical
extracellular cues involving three different receptor sys-
tems: an integrin, an RTK or a GPCR. For that purpose,
we engineered pseudopod purification assays for NIH
3 T3 fibroblasts that directionally extend pseudopods in
response to a fibronectin gradient (haptotaxis), a platelet
derived growth factor (PDGF) gradient (PDGF chemo-
taxis) or a Lysophosphatidic acid (LPA) gradient (LPA
chemotaxis). We then used quantitative proteomics
techniques to identify pseudopod and cell-body pro-
teomes and phospho-proteomes in the three cell migra-
tion modes. We find that specific proteins are recruited
to and phosphorylated in the pseudopod depending on
the cue that drives the prototypical modes of directional
cell migration. This provides a resource for the cell migra-
tion community to explore cue-specific spatio-temporal
signaling networks within one specific cell system.
Results
To purify pseudopods and cell-body in the three cell mi-
gration modes (Figure 1A), we adapted a previously de-
scribed assay that consists of a microporous transwell
filter to purify pseudopods from the cell-body [10]. In
this assay, the 3 µm pores of the transwell filter allow
protrusion of pseudopods but hinder the translocation
of the cell-body. Because the pseudopod only represents
a small amount of the total cell mass, it is not possible
to directly compare absolute protein abundance in both
fractions on a per cell basis. To estimate relative protein
enrichment in the pseudopod and cell-body fractions,
we compared equal protein amounts of both fractions,
as in previous studies [10,11]. A simple ratio of protein
abundance in both fractions therefore represents the
relative density of a protein in pseudopods or cell-body.
The modified original assay used for the induction dir-
ectional pseudopod protrusion in response to different
extracellular cues, is shown in Figure 1B [10]. For the hap-
totaxis cell migration model, the bottom surface of the
filter was coated with fibronectin, and for the chemotaxis
cell migration system, the top and bottom filter surface
were coated with fibronectin. Directionality was imposed
by adding chemokines (PDGF or LPA) to the bottom
(chemotaxis) or the top and bottom compartments (che-
mokinesis). Chemokines were absent in the hapto -taxis
or -kinesis experimental systems. Fluorescence time-lapse
monitoring the membrane protrusion was started one
hour after the attachment time, when chemokines were
added (Figure 1C). An additional movie file shows this in
more detail (Additional file 1). Fluorescence intensity per
field of view was integrated over time and represents the
rate of membrane protrusion on the bottom filter surface
(Figure 1D).
During haptokinesis, uncoordinated protrusion/retrac-
tion events led to inefficient global membrane protru-
sion to the bottom filter surface. Similar results were
observed for the PDGF and LPA chemokinesis controls.
During haptotaxis, synchronized membrane protrusion
without retraction events allowed efficient global mem-
brane protrusion to the bottom filter surface. We ob-
served that the rate of membrane protrusion followed a
Fengos et al. Proteome Science2014, 12:23 Page 2 of 18
http://www.proteomesci.com/content/12/1/23
linear progression up to two hours after plating. PDGF
chemotaxis immediately led to very efficient membrane
protrusion that subsequently dampened, but were still
strong 1 hour after stimulation, especially when compared
to the chemokinesis control. LPA chemotaxis led to a
continuous linear increase of the fluorescent protruding
Figure 1Pseudopod purification system. (A)Cartoon of directional migration in response to different cues. Integrins, RTKs or GPCR can all
induce directional cell migration.(B). Different experimental strategies to induce hapto- or chemo- taxis directional, versus control hapto- or
chemo- kinesis random cell migration on 3μm transwell filters.(C,D). Pseudopod extension dynamics on bottom filter surface.(C) Live imaging
of pseudopod protrusion of bottom transwell surface. Serum-starved, Celltracker-labeled fibroblasts, were allowed to attach on the filter for
one hour, stimulated with or not with chemoattractants and timelapse imaging was started for 3 hours. Bar = 50μm. (D). Quantification of
pseudopodial extension. Fluorescent intensity on the bottom filter was integrated and normalized to time point 0. Normalized signal indicates
kinetics of membrane protrusion.
Fengos et al. Proteome Science2014, 12:23 Page 3 of 18
http://www.proteomesci.com/content/12/1/23
membrane, which was not observed during the chemokin-
esis control. These experiments show that robust and syn-
chronized membrane protrusion can be observed in each
of the cell migration modes up to one hour after growth
factor stimulation in the chemotaxis, and up to 2 hours in
the haptotaxis experimental systems. Thus, this allows
purification of these pseudopods in a defined morphody-
namic state of protrusion.
We then performed a series of high-resolution immuno-
staining experiments in which we labeled the F-actin
(green) and microtubule cytoskeletons (red), as well as the
nucleus (blue) (Figure 2A-B). We only observed nuclei on
the top filter surface, indicating that cell bodies cannot
squeeze to the bottom surface (compare Figure 2A and B).
In haptokinesis, fibroblasts were able to spread well on the
fibronectin on the top surface. Consistently with the ab-
sence of fibronectin on the top surface, lower levels of
spreading and F-actin were observed in haptotaxis. In
the chemotaxis experimental systems, LPA led to a slight
increase in spreading while PDGF decreased the amount
of spreading and F-actin content on the top filter surface
compared to haptokinesis. These results are shown in
Figure 2A and quantified in Figure 2C. This indicates
different adhesive states in the three cell migration modes,
leading to changes in cell morphology. Thus, LPA en-
ables a highly adhesive state, while PDGF leads to dim-
ished adhesion to the fibronectin substrate. Evaluation of
pseudopods on the bottom filter surface also revealed
morphological differences (Figure 2B). In haptotaxis, most
protrusions were spread out and covered a large surface.
Conversely, a mix of spread and streamlined protrusions
(suggesting that they were fixed during a retraction event)
were observed in haptokinesis. Consistently with this, a
decrease in pseudopod spreading area was observed when
haptokinesis was compared to haptotaxis (Figure 2D).
During both LPA and PDGF chemotaxis, less spread
protrusions were observed (the latter were even less
spread than in the haptokinesis experimental paradigm,
Figure 2D). Together with the time-lapse experiments men-
tioned above, these experiments show that the different dir-
ectional migration systems take advantage of different cell
morphologies.
Pseudopod purification was then performed in large
scale using the 2-hour postplating time in haptotaxis,
and the 1-hour post-stimulation in PDGF and LPA
chemotaxis. Representative coomassie stained gels of the
pseudopod and cell-body fractions of each cell migration
modes are shown in Figure 2E. Finally, we studied spatial
activation of MAP kinase ERK signaling in the three cell
migration modes (Figure 2F). For that purpose, we used
western blot analysis of pseudopod and cell-body frac-
tions equivalents. We observed that both PDGF and
LPA gradients lead to sustained ERK phosphorylation,
with an increase of phosphoERK signal in pseudopod
fractions. This is consistent with the ability of both che-
mokines to activate ERK [13,14]. As expected, only base-
line levels of ERK phosphorylation were detected in
haptotaxis. This is consistent with absence of growth
factor stimulation. Together, these results indicate the
existence of different adhesive states in the three cell mi-
gration modes, that correlate with different morpho-
logical and signaling states.
Quantification of pseudopod/cell-body protein enrichment
To get a large scale view of the proteins and the phospho-
proteins that are recruited to the pseudopod, we per-
formed quantitative proteomics and phospho-proteomics
of the pseudopod and cell-body fractions from the three
distinct cell migrations modes. For that purpose, we puri-
fied equal amount (1 mg) of pseudopod and cell-body
fractions from the three cell migrations modes: haptotaxis,
PDGF chemotaxis, LPA chemotaxis, leading to 6 different
fractions. Lysates from different experiments were pooled,
and were analyzed in three technical replicates, leading
to 18 mass-spectrometry runs for each proteomic and
phospho-proteomics runs.
Two measures for the quantification of protein abun-
dance in a given fraction were tested: the discrete peptide
spectral counts, and the area of the peak associated to a
peptide spectrum. Although both measurements were
found to correlate (Figure S1A, Additional file 2), the con-
tinuous measure of the peptide peak area was used, be-
cause of its higher resolution, enabling higher accuracy.
Furthermore, the quality of these measurements was eval-
uated by comparing the standard deviation of the tech-
nical triplicates with the mean of the corresponding values
(Figure S1B,C, Additional file 2). Different colour coding
illustrates that the standard deviation of the measure-
ments ranges in the same levels as the mean values (black)
for only 3% of the proteomics, and 2% for the phospho-
proteomic measurements, whereas for the majority of the
measurements the standard deviation is less than 2-times
(red), or less than 10-times (blue) than their correspond-
ing mean value (Figure S1B,C, Additional file 2).
Given that the noise in the measurements scales with
the absolute level of detected peptides, the variance of
each triplet had to be defined in a scale invariant way.
Therefore the coefficient of variation was used as a nor-
malized measure to describe dispersion for the measure-
ment triplicates corresponding to each peptide. Peptide
measurements with a coefficient of variation greater
than 0.5 were excluded so as to ensure a signal to noise
ratio of at least 2 (Figure S1D,E, Additional file 2). Pro-
tein information was obtained by taking into account all
the peptides or phospho-peptides corresponding to a
unique international protein index (IPI) number. To ob-
tain the relative protein or phosphorylation abundance
in the pseudopod or cell-body fractions we first grouped
Fengos et al. Proteome Science2014, 12:23 Page 4 of 18
http://www.proteomesci.com/content/12/1/23
Figure 2(See legend on next page.)
Fengos et al. Proteome Science2014, 12:23 Page 5 of 18
http://www.proteomesci.com/content/12/1/23
all the peptides that correspond to a specific international
protein index (IPI), and calculated the median value for
each of the technical repeats to avoid the effect of outliers.
The ratio of these median values was then calculated for
each cell migration mode. For the calculation of these ra-
tios for each experimental condition we further excluded
peptides by constraining the sum of coefficients of vari-
ation of their technical repeats of each cell migration
mode to 0.8, to avoid dividing noisy measurements. For
these confident triplets of each cell migration mode the
enrichment ratio of their corresponding median was cal-
culated to avoid the bias of any outliers.
Translating the IPI to protein names in both datasets
results in 2079 ensemble gene names for the proteomics
and 919 for the phospho-proteomic dataset. After apply-
ing these filtering conditions we ended up with 1757
unique protein identifiers for the proteomic dataset, and
874 for the phospho-proteomic dataset. Additional infor-
mation concerning the identification of the proteomic
dataset including spectral counts, percentage of protein
sequence coverage, and total number of peptides identi-
fied for each protein can be found in a supplementary
dataset (Additional file 3). Importantly, standardization
of our experimental procedure allows for comparison of
the relative pseudopod/cell-body enrichment of all these
proteins among the three cell migration modes. A list of
the proteins and phospho-peptides are provided in the
supplementary datasets (Additional files 4 and 5). In our
dataset serine phosphorylation is the most prominent
phosphorylation event (88.21%), while tyrosine (2.31%)
and threonine (9.49%) phosphorylations are much less
often observed. Similar proportions were previously re-
ported in Phospho-ELM [15].
In order to compare relative enrichment levels, a thresh-
old ratio for enrichment ratio was defined. In Western
Blot analysis a 2-fold relative higher intensity is typically
taken as indicative of enrichment. Accordingly, in our
analysis we considered proteins with enrichment ratios
less than 2-fold to be equally distributed between the cell-
body-fraction and the pseudopod-fraction, proteins with
enrichment ratios of 2 to 5-fold as slightly enriched, and
with ratios of more than 5-fold mostly present in one
compartment (Figure 3A). As expected, in all three cell
migration modes most proteins appear to be equally
distributed between the cell-body-fraction and the
protrusion-fraction. These most likely represent soluble
proteins, that do not have specific localizations in the cell-
body or in the pseudopod. Thus, they have homogeneous
protein density throughout the cell and will appear as
equally distributed when pseudopod/cell-body equivalents
are compared. We then observed that there are slightly
more proteins that have a biased localization to the cell-
body versus the pseudopod (Figure 3Aa). In the phospho-
proteome, a large set of phosphorylated proteins were
again equally distributed (Figure 3Ab), with slightly more
proteins that are present mostly in the cell body.
As a mean of removing proteins that might not be dir-
ectly related to the signalling responses, apart from the en-
tire dataset (Figure 3Aa,b) we also looked more specifically
on the subset of the proteome that has previously been
identified as relevant to signaling [16]. In the subset of
signaling proteins of the proteomic data, the fraction of
equally distributed proteinsbetween compartments is even
higher (Figure 3Ac), and there is no clear trend towards
enriched or not enriched proteins. However, when we
focused on the subset of signalling proteins [17] of the
phospho-proteomic dataset a clear enrichment at the
protrusion is observed among all stimulation modes
(Figure 3Ad). This suggests that the receptors that trigger
the different cell migration modes do not alter the overall
protein localisation as much as the phosphorylation state
of the signaling proteins.
Quality control of the proteomic and phospho-proteomic
dataset using protein classification
The availability of large scale proteomic data allows us to
perform a series of internal controls assessing the quality
of our dataset using protein metadata from databases.
(See figure on previous page.)
Figure 2Further characterization of pseudopod purification system. (A,B)Cell body and pseudopod morphologies in the different cell
migration systems. Cells were allowed to attach for 1 hour, then treated with or not with chemoattractants for another hour. Filters were then
fixed and stained. Pseudopods (bottom filter) or cell bodies (top filter) were then scratched away; filters were mounted and evaluated using
epifluorescence microscopy with a 60x high numerical aperture. Representative micrographs indicating nuclei in blue (DAPI), tubulin in red
(α-tubulin), and F-actin in green (phalloidin) are shown. Single channels in inverted black and white contrast, as well as color composites are
shown. Bar = 20 µm.(A) Cell body morphology.(B) Pseudopod morphology.(C,D) Quantification of relative cell body (top filter surface) or
pseudopod (bottom filter surface) spreading. Region of interest in the images shown in(A,B) were manually drawn, and area was measured. Area
was then normalized to the average cell body or pseudopod areas observed in haptokinesis. Average as well as standard deviations are shown.
Statistical significance is indicated (T-test, **: p < 0.05, n.s.: non-significant).(C) Cell body area.(D) Pseudopod area. (E,F) Biochemical analysis of
pseudopod and cell body fractions in the different cell migration modes. Equal amounts of cell body and pseudopod fractions were analyzed.
(E)Coomassie stained gel of pseudopod and cell body fractions in the different cell migration modes.(F) ERK activation status in the different
pseudopod and cell body fractions. Different fractions were probed with anti phospho-ERK and total-ERK antibodies. Note that phospho-ERK and
total-ERK signals comes from two independent western blots. Raw data is shown in supplementary Figure S5.
Fengos et al. Proteome Science2014, 12:23 Page 6 of 18
http://www.proteomesci.com/content/12/1/23
Figure 3(See legend on next page.)
Fengos et al. Proteome Science2014, 12:23 Page 7 of 18
http://www.proteomesci.com/content/12/1/23
We first analyzed the distribution of the subcellular
localization and function of all the proteins and phos
pho-proteins we identified (regardless of any spatial infor-
mation deduced from our fractionation scheme), and
compared them to a reference dataset consisting of the
whole mouse proteome.
Obviously, our proteomic dataset only represents a small
s u b s e to ft h ew h o l em o u s ep r o t e o m e .A saq u a l i t yc o n t r o l ,
we compared the distribution of subcellular localizations
and functions of the proteins and phospho-proteins we
identified with those of the whole mouse proteome, ignor-
ing any information about subcellular localization extracted
from our fractionation scheme. For that purpose, we simply
compared all the proteins and phospho-proteins we identi-
fied to a reference protein set that consisted of all the pro-
tein names of STRING forMus Musculus (Figure S2,
Additional file 2) [17]. The meta-data information regard-
ing subcellular localization and protein type were then ex-
tracted using the commercial database software Ingenuity
Pathways (IPA - Ingenuity® Systems, www.ingenuity.com).
Apart from the fact that there were a significant higher
number of proteins with unmapped subcellular localization
i nt h ew h o l em o u s ep r o t e o m e ,w eo b s e r v e dad e c r e a s ei n
the number of extracellular proteins in our experimental
dataset, which can be because these proteins most likely are
washed away during our purification procedure (Figure
S2A, Additional file 2). We found an increase of cytoplas-
mic proteins in the experimental proteomic and phospho-
proteomic versus the reference dataset that most likely
results from the fact that these proteins are easier to extract
and detect using mass-spectrometry. An increase in the oc-
currence of phosphorylated nuclear proteins was also ob-
served, probably reflecting a large degree of regulation of
these proteins by phosphorylation. We then compared the
distribution of protein functions present in our experimen-
t a lv e r s u st h er e f e r e n c ew h o l em o u s ep r o t e o m ed a t a s e t
(Figure S2B, Additional file 2). We observed a notable de-
crease in the amount of GPCRs identified experimentally
compared with the whole proteome dataset, which is con-
sistent with the low abundanceand low solubility of these
membrane proteins [18]. Kinases were observed to be
well represented in the experimental proteomic dataset,
and were enriched 2-fold in the phospho-proteomic data-
set. This implies that kinases are more likely to be found
in a phosphorylated state, thus supporting the existence
of kinase-based signalling cascades as means of signal
transduction. Transcriptional regulators were found in
low abundance, but were also enriched in the phospho-
proteome, again indicating a large degree of regulation
of these proteins. These results indicate that there is no
specific bias of our proteomic analysis to proteins with a
relatively high representation of some protein types (ex-
cept for GPCRs). Thus, our experimental dataset faithfully
represents a subset of the whole mouse proteome.
Quality control of biochemical fractionation scheme using
protein classification
To control the quality of our cell fractionation scheme, we
evaluated the distribution of specific subcellular localization
descriptors in the different pseudopod or cell-body frac-
tions. For that purpose, we scored the occurrence of
proteins with different localizations (plasma membrane,
cytoplasm and nuclear localisation) in the different com-
partments (Figure 3B a). The proteins sets taken into ac-
count here correspond to the union of proteins that follow
the same enrichment pattern as in Figure 3A irrespective of
cell migration mode. As expected, we observed a bimodal
distribution of cytoplasmic proteins, with these proteins be-
ing highly abundant in the equally distributed set of pro-
teins, and less abundant in the cell-body and pseudopod
fractions. Nuclear proteins were highly enriched in the cell-
body and less abundant in the pseudopod. Plasma mem-
b r a n ep r o t e i n sw e r ee n r i c h e di nt h ep s e u d o p o df r a c t i o n .
This might arise because of an increase of plasma mem-
brane in the pseudopod fraction, and/or because of gradi-
ent sensing mechanisms that enable directional migration.
When the subcellular localization of phospho-proteins
was analyzed (Figure 3B b), we observed the same trend
for nuclear and plasma membrane proteins. However, in
marked contrast with the proteomic dataset, we observed
an increase in phosphorylated, cytosolic proteins in the
pseudopod. This suggests that phosphorylated cytosolic
proteins are recruited to the pseudopod during directed
cell migration. Using a similar approach as mentioned
(See figure on previous page.)
Figure 3Subcellular distribution of proteins and phospho-proteins in the different cell migration modes. (A)Migration-mode dependent
distribution of proteins in different cell compartments. Histograms report the number of proteins in the three cell migration modes (Red-HAPTO,
Green-PDGF, Blue-LPA). Pseudopod highly-enriched (P-HE) are more than 5-fold enriched in pseudopod; Pseudopod enriched (P-E) are 2 to 5 fold
enriched in the pseudopod; Same enrichment (Same) are equally distributed in the cell; Cell-body enriched (CB-E) are 2 to 5 fold enriched in
the cell-body; Cell-body highly-enriched (CB-HE) are more than 5-fold enriched in cell-body. The different plots correspond to(a) all proteomic
dataset (1743 gene names),(b) all phosho-proteomic dataset (874 gene names), and(c) the subset of proteins (259) or(d) phosho-proteins (191)
that belong to a previously defined signalling proteome [5].(B) “Spatial” distribution of protein localization and protein types. Percentage of
proteins belonging to the three main cellular components(a,b), or the main protein types(c,d) with respect to the protein sets belonging to
the distinct“spatial” regions of the cell implied by their relative enrichment ranges (as in Figure 3A, without specifying the highly-enriched (HE)) ir-
respective of cell migration mode.
Fengos et al. Proteome Science2014, 12:23 Page 8 of 18
http://www.proteomesci.com/content/12/1/23
above, we then also evaluated the spatial organization of
identified proteins and phospho-proteins according to their
type (Figure 3B c,d). Because of their low occurrence,
highly enriched proteins introduced a statistical bias
when subdivided in multiple protein types, and were
therefore ignored. An enrichment in kinases at the pro-
tein and phospho-protein level was obvious in the pseudo-
pod. This is consistent with a large degree of regulation at
this subcellular localization. Importantly, this might also
directly results from a bias due to our subcellular fraction-
ation scheme: more efficient identification of kinases
might occur because this cell fraction does not contain a
lot of the highly abundant proteins involved in the meta-
bolic machinery present in the cell-body that might
obscure such low abundant proteins. Transcriptional reg-
ulators were abundant in the cell body at the proteomic
and phospho-proteomic level, consistently their role at
this subcellular localization. Finally, enzymes were not sig-
nificantly enriched in any fraction at the proteomic level,
but showed a clear bias to the cell-body at the phosphopro-
teomic level. These phosphorylated enzymes most likely
represent the metabolic machinery that is regulated within
the cell body, and to a lesser extent in pseudopods. These
results give further insight into the spatial organization of
proteins and phospho-proteins during cell migration.
Spatial organization of signaling networks regulating cell
migration
We then sought to identify receptor specific spatio-
temporal signaling networks inherent to the different
cell migration modes. In order to put the proteomic and
phospho-proteomic data into a regulatory context, IPA
was used to extract information regarding their associ-
ation with canonical pathways. For that purpose, we se-
lected thirty signaling pathways that are most relevant to
signaling and cell migration. We then first evaluated
proteomic coverage of these specific signaling pathways
(Figure 4A,B, Additional files 6 and 7). Here, the cover-
age was defined as the fraction of proteins in the data to
the total size of each pathway. The coverage ranges from
25% to 95% for the proteomics and from 20% to 65% for
the phospho-proteomics. Not all proteins in IPA include
canonical pathway annotation, and those that do are
usually members of multiple canonical pathways. This
data indicates a high degree of coverage of signaling
pathways related to signaling and cell migration in our
proteomic and phospho-proteomic datasets.
To try to pinpoint specific spatio-temporal signaling
networks that are relevant to the different cell migration
modes, we evaluated the spatial distribution of these
representative "signaling and cell migration" networks
in the three cell migration modes. For that purpose,
like in Figure 3B, in Figure 4C,D we grouped proteins
and phospho-proteins in three categories: Pseudopod-
Enriched (P-E) are the proteins that are enriched more
than 2 times in the pseudopod, proteins that are distrib-
uted the same (SAME) in the two compartments are less
than 2 times enriched in the pseudopod or cell-body,
and Cell-Body Enriched (CB-E) proteins are enriched
more than 2 times in the cell-body. Canonical pathways
were ranked according to their signaling pathway cover-
age. Most proteins of the cell migration pathways were
equally distributed (Figure 4C). This stems in part from
the higher number of proteins, and thus the higher
coverage in this specific fraction. We did not observe
clear enrichment of specific signaling networks in pseu-
dopods versus cell-body when all the cell migration
modes are considered as a whole. Furthermore we inves-
tigated whether proteins follow the same pattern of en-
richment among the different modes of migration. Based
on the same enrichment thresholds as in Figure 4, we
find coherent enrichment among the three modes, as
there are only four proteins in the proteomic and one
in the phospho-proteomic dataset that are enriched in
different fractions for different cell migration modes
(Figure S3, Additional file 2); these are all not known to
be relevant to cell migration. However, clear cell migra-
tion mode specific pathways are found to be enriched in
pseudopods. It is important to point out that this results
from low data coverage. By example "RhoGDI signaling"
indicates no pseudopod-enriched protein in haptotaxis,
4 pseudopod-enriched proteins in PDGF chemotaxis,
and 2 pseudopod-enriched proteins in LPA chemotaxis.
Furthermore, as the pathways are listed in descending
order of their coverage, towards the lower part of the
heat map many proteins might be just missing, making
the comparison between the three cell migration modes
less reliable. Thus, in this proteomic dataset, protein
enrichment has to be looked at on a case by case basis,
and only gives limited information about true signaling
networks. Within our signaling and cell migration pro-
tein set, only 10 proteins were found to be pseudopod
enriched. In haptotaxis, only IQGAP3, an adaptor pro-
tein that regulates Rho GTPase signaling, was found
to be pseudopod-enriched specifically in this cell migra-
tion mode. Arp2/3 complex subunits (ARPC3, ARPC4,
ARPC5L), vascular-endothelial cadherin (CDH5) and the
adhesion related adaptor protein CRKL were pseudopod
specific in PDGF chemotaxis. The Arp2/3 complex sub-
unit (ARPC4), the CD44 surface glycoprotein, the Ras
GTPase K-RAS and the adhesion protein ACTN4 were
pseudopod specific in LPA chemotaxis. The functional
significance of these proteins will have to be studied on
a case by case basis.
When the subcellular distribution of phospho-proteins
of this representative "signaling and cell migration" net-
work was evaluated, we found a high level of phosphor-
ylation in equally distributed protein but also pseudopod
Fengos et al. Proteome Science2014, 12:23 Page 9 of 18
http://www.proteomesci.com/content/12/1/23
Figure 4(See legend on next page.)
Fengos et al. Proteome Science2014, 12:23 Page 10 of 18
http://www.proteomesci.com/content/12/1/23
proteins (Figure 4D). No preferential receptor-specific
signaling networks were highlighted, and phospho-
proteins therefore have to be evaluated on a case by case
basis. Interestingly, there was a lower content of phos-
phorylated "signaling and cell migration" relevant pro-
teins in the cell body in haptotaxis. This suggests that a
sole integrin engagement in haptotaxis leads to lower
amount of phosphorylation events in the cell body than
when RTK or GPCR signaling crosstalks with integrins
during chemotaxis.
Network context of identified proteins
We then took an additional approach to put our specific
proteomic datasets in the network context of the differ-
ent cell migration modes which depend on three proto-
typical receptors. For that purpose, we evaluated
whether proteins known to interact with these receptors,
or their downstream effectors, are enriched in pseudo-
pods triggered by receptor-specific cues. Therefore, a
graph of interacting proteins was created based on the
STRING database. STRING combines information from
many different sources on protein-protein interactions
[17], and each source provides protein-protein inter-
action information of different quality, which is reflected
in a score that runs between 0 and 999. Using different
threshold for the sum (their sum ranges from 300 to
8246) of all these scores we queried the names of all
proteins that would interact either with the integrin, the
GPCR, or RTK receptors in the STRING database, start-
ing with one representative protein from each prototyp-
ical receptor type. We used the fibroblast expressed
integrin alpha5 (ITGA5) for haptotaxis, the LPA recep-
tor (LPAR1) for LPA chemotaxis and the PDGF receptor
(PDGFRB) for PDGF chemotaxis. We subsequently re-
peated the query twice to obtain the names of proteins
interacting with these binding proteins (distance two
from the receptor) and those proteins at distance three
from the receptor (Figure 5). STRING reports 17919
protein names in ENSMUSP identifiers formus muscu-
lus. By using database dictionaries, the 2357 ensemble
gene names in our dataset match 947 ensemble gene
names in STRING (342 for the proteomic dataset and
712 for the phospho-proteomic dataset). The coverage
of STRING proteins by the data is relatively low. By in-
creasing the threshold of the score, the number of pro-
teins in STRING is reduced, but the coverage remains
almost constant, especially for distance two and three
from the receptor. Looking only at the proteins that are
enriched at the pseudopod more than 2-fold, at least in
one mode of migration, the number of proteins is lim-
ited even further (Figure S4, Additional file 2). As we
can see by using the STRING database, there are more
PDGFR related proteins than integrin related ones, and
even less LPAR related ones. Given that there is no ref-
erence for receptor interconnectivity, this may be just
because of the relative amount of studies that has been
carried out on each of the systems. The coverage of all
the experimental data and every receptor with respect to
what is expected from STRING (Figure 5) ranges around
10% for the first order neighbours and drops to 5% for
order three as a result of inclusion of irrelevant proteins
and high connectivity of the network. To investigate to
which extent the different receptor systems can be sepa-
rated (Figure 6), we excluded all the shared neighbours
of the three receptor types, and focused on receptor
specific protein sets. Considering either the full STRING
database for mus musculus (Figure 6A) or the subset
corresponding all the experimentally identified proteins
(Figure 6B), both for increasing stringencies of the inter-
action score in STRING, similar trend was observed: the
set of specific-receptor associated proteins is low for the
first order neighbours, increases for the second order
(especially for the PDGF), and drops almost to zero for
third order interactions. This shows that the cross-grained
scoring of protein interactions in databases does enable
yet an analysis at the level of distinct pathway resolution.
Comparison of relative enrichment of proteins and
phospho-proteins
We then studied if there was any relationship in the sub-
cellular localization of proteins and phospho-proteins.
Given that the phospho-proteomics measurement tech-
nique has lower sensitivity than the proteomics, only
274 proteins were common to both the proteomic and
the phospho-proteomic datasets. Because of the rela-
tively low amount of proteins available for this analysis,
(See figure on previous page.)
Figure 4Spatial organization of cell migration related signalling pathways in the three cell migration modes. (A,B)Histogram (black) of
the coverage (x100%) of cell migration related pathways, ranked in descending order based on the proteomic and phospho-proteomic data sets.
For every pathway the absolute number of proteins contained in the data is illustrated with thinner red bars. The level of absolute overlap of
subsequent pathways is illustrated with horizontal green segments connecting the red bars. The list of the canonical pathways is indicated on
every figure.(C,D) Heatmaps of enrichment for the relevant canonical pathways of the proteomic and phospho-proteomic data sets. The pathway
names are listed according to descending pathway coverage, and their names correspond exactly to the numbering of panelsA and B. The
logarithmic ratio of number of proteins found in each enrichment range, and for every cell migration mode, to the total number of proteins in
the data for this pathway, is indicated by a colour map which ranges from green to red. Green corresponds to no proteins and red to all the
proteins of this pathway.
Fengos et al. Proteome Science2014, 12:23 Page 11 of 18
http://www.proteomesci.com/content/12/1/23
we directly correlated enrichment values considering
all data) or for protein enrichment values higher than
1.2-fold (Figure 7). We observed an evident correlation
between phosphorylation and protein enrichment in all
three cell migration modes, implying that proteins that
are specifically phosphorylated in the pseudopod or
the cell-body are also enriched there. This suggest that
most phosphorylated proteins are spatially regulated
by immobilization in specific protein complexes serving as
subcellular anchors, rather than being locally phosphory-
lated by reaction diffusion mechanisms involving co-
ordinated spatial control of kinases and phosphatases [19].
Discussion
In this study, we provide for the first time large-scale in-
formation about the spatial organization of proteins
and phospho-proteins during three different modes of di-
rected cell migration, that involve signaling through dis-
tinct prototypical receptors systems: integrins, RTKs and
GPCRs. This study makes an important first step towards
unravelling the complexity of directed cell migration
by underlying the importance of spatially distinct signal-
ling events. For that purpose, we adapted a previously-
described pseudopod purification system to three distinct
stimuli that engage the different prototypical receptor
systems. Our approach has several beneficial features
when compared to classic proteomic approaches to study
cell signaling in large scale that take advantage of bulk
stimulation with ECM components or growth factors. Be-
yond providing spatial information (relative pseudopod/
cell-body enrichment), our approach is very effective at
producing robust signaling responses: 1. the response to
ECM or chemokine gradients is likely to trigger amplifica-
tion mechanisms leading to strong signaling responses; 2.
the synchronization of membrane protrusion in a specific
morphodynamic state (extension) leads to a homogeneous
signaling state across the cell population. Thus, it is
uniquely suited to study signaling networks downstream
of prototypical receptor systems in the context of directed
cell migration.
The availability of large scale information about the
subcellular localization of proteins and phospho-proteins
enables us to understand some emergent properties of
spatial regulation of signaling during cell migration. As
already previously observed [10,11], we observed an
asymmetric subcellular localization of proteins between
the pseudopod and the cell-body. As quality control, nu-
clear and membrane proteins were found to be enriched
Figure 5Network embedding of the three prototypical receptors in the three cell migration modes.The number (black) and the fraction
(red) of proteins for each of the three cell migration modes (squares:HAPTO, diamonds:PDGF, circles:LPA) matching the names of the protein
network originating at integrin, RTK and GPCR receptors based on the STRING interaction database formus musculus. The three rows correspond
to consideration of different sets of the experimental data:(A) Phospho-proteomics, (B) Proteomics and (C) Proteomics & Phospho-proteomics.
Columns correspond to the neighbouring distance of order one, two or three from the receptors of origin.
Fengos et al. Proteome Science2014, 12:23 Page 12 of 18
http://www.proteomesci.com/content/12/1/23
and phosphorylated in the cell-body and in the pseudo-
pod respectively, indicating that our fractionation
scheme allows for enrichment of the right proteins. One
interesting insight was that kinases are highly likely to
be phosphorylated in the pseudopod, suggesting that
during the process of cell migration kinase networks are
recruited at that subcellular localization. When correlat-
ing the subcellular localization of proteins and their
phosphorylated form (n = 274 proteins), we observed
that when a protein is enriched at a specific subcellular
localization, then it is also phosphorylated there. This
suggests that most phosphorylated proteins are spatially
regulated by immobilization in specific protein com-
plexes that serve as subcellular anchors.
Because many of the identified proteins are not relevant
to cell signaling, we focused our attention on a subset of
proteins involved in signaling and cell migration. While
we initially anticipated that we would observe robust re-
cruitment of cell migration mode specific signaling net-
works that might indicate some of their inherent features,
we could not identify clear differences between the
three cell migration modes. Considering that cell mi-
gration is the outcome of an integrated process, the
flow of the signal through chemo-receptors needs to be
eventually translated into mechanical stress exerted by
integrins. Therefore, the overall alignment between the
different modes of cell migration is not that surprising.
Consistently with the existence of regulation of cyto-
skeletal and adhesion dynamics in both subcellular
compartments, observation of these "signaling and cell
migration" related protein ensembles did not show clear
segregation to the pseudopod. However, one important
limitation is the relatively low coverage that was obtained
in our proteomics analysis (1757 proteins total with a large
number of proteins being equally distributed between the
pseudopod/cell-body fractions). In the future, the increased
sensitivity of mass-spectrometry approaches is likely to
yield higher protein coverage, in turn allowing a better view
of low abundant signaling proteins. In our previous study
of the neurite/soma proteomes of neurons with approxi-
mately 4800 proteins identified [11], a better coverage in
signaling proteins was evident within the neurite, and
allowed more efficient identification of canonical pathways.
In contrast to the proteins, the "signaling and cell migra-
tion"-related phospho-proteins were clearly biased to the
pseudopods. Here again however, we could not distinguish
any clear cell migration mode specific patterns. These
findings also suggest that signalling stimuli do not alter
the overall protein localisation as much as the phosphoryl-
ation state of the regulatory proteins, supporting the
Figure 6All neighbouring proteins and receptor-specific proteins based on STRING interaction database. (A)Number of protein
neighbours for distances 1,2 and 3 from each one of the three receptors (squares:ITGA5, diamonds:PDGFRB, circles:LPAR1) according to the entire
STRING interaction database formus musculus is indicated either for proteins that are specifically associated with each receptor system (Red), or
for proteins that have also shared interactions between the three receptor types (Black). The same figure is illustrated for increasing stringency
indicated by the STRING interaction score (300, 450, 600 and 750).(B) Same plots for the subset of proteins contained in the entire
experimental dataset.
Fengos et al. Proteome Science2014, 12:23 Page 13 of 18
http://www.proteomesci.com/content/12/1/23
existence of kinase-based signalling cascades as means of
signal transduction.
One important current limitation of our understanding
of these spatio-temporal networks still resides in the lack
of studies of cell signaling during cell migration with tools
that allow understanding the fine regulation of this
process. By example, recent evidence has shown that dur-
ing fibroblast cell migration in response to fibronectin (as
in haptotaxis) involve a complex Rho GTPase signaling
network [20]. Here, Rac1, Cdc42 and RhoA are activated
in highly defined, micrometer-regions that switch ON
and OFF on time scales of tens of seconds. In contrast,
PDGF-induced fibroblast cell migration (as in PDGF
chemotaxis) involves a mode of membrane protrusion
without RhoA activity [21]. Consistently, we observe dif-
ferent Rho GTPase regulators that are differentially phos-
phorylated in the pseudopods depending on the cell
migration mode. These most likely regulate these differ-
ent, dynamic spatio-temporal Rho GTPase signaling net-
works. Our proteomic dataset might serve as a starting
point to understand this complex spatio-temporal modu-
larity. The lack of adequate data on spatio-temporal sig-
naling during cell migration, also explains our inability to
identify receptor-specific signaling networks.
In order to place into context all subtle differences be-
tween cell migration modes that are encountered
throughout the analysis, this study could be followed up
by high content imaging experiments that are focused
on key proteins. Single node perturbations in a large
scale would shed light into causal relationships of pro-
tein interactions, and would contribute to a systems un-
derstanding of signal integration at the receptor level.
This would provide with context specific subgroups of
the whole proteomic data. Combining this with manu-
ally curated networks would enable the construction
of a cell migration interaction map, pointing out key
components whose dynamic interactions could then be
monitored and studied to further understand their
regulatory role.
While still not enabling the understanding of emergent
properties of receptor-dependent spatial signaling net-
works, the general findings of our study provide a com-
prehensive resource for the cell migration community.
Our analysis also gives an overview of the potential, but
also the current limitations in the systematic study of
proteomic data in a biological context. The results of the
analysis for mouse fibroblasts serve as a resource for the
general research community, and as a basis for researchers
Figure 7Correlation of enrichment based on the intersection of proteomic and phospho-proteomic data.Scatter plots in logarithmic
scale of the phospho-proteomic versus the proteomic enrichment for proteins that exist in both datasets. The number of proteins considered var-
ies according to the selected threshold of enrichment:(A) All common data (274 proteins),(B) 1.2-fold (87 proteins), or(C) 2-fold (11 proteins).
Colour code: HAPTO red, LPA-blue, PDGF-green.
Fengos et al. Proteome Science2014, 12:23 Page 14 of 18
http://www.proteomesci.com/content/12/1/23
involved with the systemic understanding of biological
functions.
Conclusions
Using a previously established purification-scheme we
demonstrated that it is possible to study the spatio-
temporal characteristics of signaling downstream of pro-
totypical receptor systems in the context of directed cell
migration. By comparing the whole proteomic dataset
with its subset, which has previously been characterized as
relevant to signalling, we were able to show the bias of
phosphorylation events towards the pseudopod of the cell.
Moreover, the existence of phosphorylated kinases at the
cell front points out the potential compartment-specific
role of kinases as means of signal transduction during di-
rected cell migration. Our analysis also illustrates the
current limitations in combining such large-scale prote-
omic datasets with protein interaction databases for fur-
ther characterization of their role in a network context.
The results of this analysis can be used as a resource for
further research in fibroblast cell migration assays, and
could be taken into account in similar studies of the field.
Materials and methods
Cell culture
NIH 3 T3 mouse fibroblasts (American Tissue Culture
Collection) were cultured in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s
medium (DMEM) (Invitrogen) supplemented with 10%
fetal bovine serum (FBS), 1% glutamine, and 1% genta-
mycin. Cells were serum starved in DMEM containing
0.5% FBS overnight before experiments.
Calibration of membrane protrusion dynamics on
transwell filter
To induce directional pseudopod protrusion in response
to different extracellular cues, we modified the original
assay as shown in Figure 1B [10]. To study the dynamics
of membrane protrusion on microporous filters, we used
24 well 3 μm microporous fluoroblock transwell filters
(Corning). Filters were first coated with 10 µg/ml fibro-
nectin for one hour at 37°C on one or both sides of the
filter. 105 serum-starved NIH 3 T3 fibroblasts previously
labeled with Celltracker green (Invitrogen) were plated
per well and allowed to attach for one hour. Membrane
protrusion from multiple wells was then analyzed simul-
taneously using live cell imaging on a Nikon Ti Eclipse
equipped with a 10× objective, steered by Metamorph
software, and using a green fluorescence filter. An auto-
focus routine that identified the filter pores in brightfield
was used to continuously keep focus on the lower filter
surface across the different filters. The fluoroblock en-
sured that only fluorescent signal from the bottom part
(from the membrane protrusions) was captured. The ex-
periment was performed for two hours with 5-minute
sampling interval. For signal analysis, images were back-
ground subtracted; mean fluorescence intensity per field
of view was averaged and normalized to fluorescence in-
tensity of the first frame.
For the haptotaxis cell migration model, we only
coated the bottom surface of the filter with 10 mg/ml fi-
bronectin, providing the cell that is plated in the top
compartment with a "binary" steep gradient of adhesion
sites between the top and bottom filter surface. As con-
trol, we used a haptokinesis cell migration system, in
which both top and bottom filters are coated with 5 mg/
ml fibronectin, allowing the cell to freely extend pseudo-
pods on the top and bottom filter surface. For the
chemotaxis cell migration system, we coated the top and
bottom filter surface with 5 mg/ml fibronectin, and im-
posed directionality by providing a gradient of PDGF or
LPA. This was achieved by adding 20 ng/ml PDGF-BB
in serum free medium containing 1% bovine serum albu-
min (BSA), or 1μg/ml LPA in serum free medium con-
taining 0.1% BSA in the bottom compartment, allowing
the formation of a diffusion gradient from the bottom to
the top chamber. As control, a chemokinesis experimen-
tal paradigm was created by adding growth factors to
both top and bottom compartments.
Because fluoroblock transwell filters are opaque, only
the fluorescent signals from pseudopods migrating to
the bottom filter surface are observed when imaged with
an inverted microscope. All experiments were performed
simultaneously allowing for fair comparison between the
different cell migration modes. PDGF and LPA were
added to the bottom (chemotaxis), or the top and bot-
tom compartments (chemokinesis). No growth factors
were added to the hapto -taxis or -kinesis experimental
systems. Fluorescence time-lapse imaging was started
after one-hour attachment time, when growth factors
were added (or not in the case of haptotaxis/haptokin-
esis experimental paradigms). This enabled the evalu-
ation of membrane protrusion at the bottom filter
surface (Figure 1C). An additional movie file shows this
in more detail (Additional file 1). Fluorescence intensity
per field of view was integrated over time and represents
the rate of membrane protrusion on the bottom filter
surface (Figure 1D).
Pseudopod and cell-body purification
For large-scale pseudopod and cell-body purification, 1.5
×1 06 serum starved NIH 3 T3 cells were plated on
fibronectin-coated transwell filters (2.4-cm wide 3 mm
microporous fluoroblock, Corning) in 6 well plates. Cells
were allowed to attach for 1 hour, and were then treated
(or not) with chemoattractants for an additional hour.
The microporous filters were then immediately fixed by
a 20-min incubation in ice-cold methanol, and the pseu-
dopods on the filter bottom or the cell bodies on the
Fengos et al. Proteome Science2014, 12:23 Page 15 of 18
http://www.proteomesci.com/content/12/1/23
filter top or where scraped away, using a cotton swab.
The remaining structures were then solubilized in the
appropriate lysis buffer. For routine Western blot ana-
lysis, a 1% SDS buffer containing protease inhibitors and
2 mM Vanadate was used. This typically yielded 30 –
40 μg of protrusion versus 800μg of cell-body lysate per
2.4 cm filter, necessitating the pooling of multiple filters
for any biochemical experiment. For proteomics studies,
cells were lysed in a buffer containing 20 mM Tris
pH 7.5, 8 M Urea, 0.1% Rapigest (Waters), 1% vanadate
and phosstop phosphatase inhibitor (Roche). 1 mg of
each protrusion and cell-body fractions were generated
and pooled for the proteomics analysis.
Sample preparation
The samples were vortexed, sonicated at 4°C (Hielscher),
shaked for 5 minutes on a thermomixer (Eppendorf) and
centrifuged for 20 minutes at 4°C and 16,000 g. Superna-
tants were collected and stored at−80°C for further pro-
cessing. BCA Protein Assay (Pierce) was used to measure
protein concentration. Disulfide bonds were reduced with
tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (Sigma) at a final concen-
tration of 10 mM at 37°C for 1 hour. Free thiols were alky-
lated with 20 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma) at room
temperature for 30 minutes in the dark. The excess of
iodoacetamide was quenched with N-acetyl cysteine
(Sigma) at a final concentration of 25 mM for 10 minutes
at room temperature. The solution was subsequently di-
luted with 0.1 M ammoniumbicarbonate (Sigma) to a final
concentration below 2 M urea and digested overnight at
37°C with sequencing-grade modified trypsin (Promega)
at a protein-to-enzyme ratio of 50:1. Peptides were
desalted on a C18 Sep-Pak cartridge (Waters) and dried
under vacuum. A small aliquot of the peptides (10%) was
taken for protein abundance measurements while the
remaining 90% were subjected to phosphopeptide analysis
using TiO2 as described previously [22]. Briefly, dried pep-
tides were dissolved in an 80% acetonitrile (ACN)– 2.5%
trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) solution saturated with phthalic
acid. Peptides were added to the same amount of equili-
brated TiO2 (5-μm bead size, GL Science) in a blocked
Mobicol spin column (MoBiTec) that was incubated for
30 minutes with end-over-end rotation. The column was
washed twice with the saturated phthalic acid solution,
twice with 80% ACN and 0.1% TFA, and finally twice with
0.1% TFA. The peptides were eluted with a 0.3 M NH4OH
solution. The pH of the eluates was adjusted to be
below 2.5 with 5% TFA solution and 2 M HCl. Phos-
phopeptides were again desalted with microspin C18
cartridges (Harvard Apparatus).
LC-MS/MS analysis
The setup of the μRPLC-MS system was as described
previously [23]. The hybrid LTQ-Orbitrap XL mass
spectrometer was interfaced to a nanoelectrospray ion
source (both Thermo Electron, Bremen, Germany)
coupled online to a Tempo 1D-plus nanoLC (Applied
Biosystems/MDS Sciex, Foster City, CA). 1μg of total
peptide mass was separated on a RP-LC column (75μm×
15 cm) packed in-house with C18 resin (Magic C18 AQ
3μm; Michrom BioResources, Auburn, CA, USA)
using a linear gradient from 96% solvent A (98% water,
2% acetonitrile, 0.15% formic acid) and 4% solvent B
(98% acetonitrile, 2% water, 0.15% formic acid) to 30%
solvent B over 120 minutes at a flow rate of 0.3μl/min.
Each survey scan acquired at 60,000 FWHM was
followed by MS/MS scans of the five most intense pre-
cursor ions in the linear ion trap with dynamic exclusion
enabled for a period of 60 seconds. Charge state screening
was employed to select for ions with at least two charges
and rejecting ions with undetermined charge state. The
normalized collision energy was set to 32% and one
microscan was acquired for each spectrum.
Database searching
After converting the acquired raw files to the centroid
mzXML format using ReAdW ( http://tools.proteome-
center.org/wiki/index.php?title=Software:ReAdW), MS/MS
spectra were searched using the SORCERER-SEQUEST™
v4.0.3 algorithm against a decoy database (consisting of
forward and reverse protein sequences) of the predicted
proteome MOUSE (IPI,www.ebi.ac.uk, release date: 16/
05/2011) and commonly observed contaminants. The
search criteria were set as follows: semi-tryptic specificity
was required (cleavage after lysine or arginine residues,
unless followed by proline, one tryptic termini required); 2
missed cleavages were allowed; carbamidomethylation (C)
was set as fixed modification; oxidation (M) was applied
as variable modification; in case of phosphopeptide
enriched samples, phosphorylation (S,T,Y) was added as
a variable modification; mass tolerance of 15 ppm (pre-
cursor) and 0.8 Da (fragments). The database search re-
sults were further processed using the PeptideProphet
[24] and ProteinProphet [25] program and the peptide
false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% on the peptide
and protein level and validated using the number of re-
verse protein sequence hits in the datasets.
Label-free quantification
The acquired raw-files were imported into the Progen-
esis software tool (Nonlinear Dynamics, Version 3.0) for
label-free quantification using the default parameters.
After feature extraction and alignment, the database
search results (in pepxml format) were imported to the
Progenesis software for MS1 feature assignment. A csv-
file containing the MS1 peak abundances of all detected
features was exported and further processed using in-
house software. In brief, the software sets the peptide/
Fengos et al. Proteome Science2014, 12:23 Page 16 of 18
http://www.proteomesci.com/content/12/1/23
phosphopeptide/protein identification level False Discov-
ery Rate to 1% (based on the number of decoy protein
sequence database hits) and normalizes the identified
MS1 peak abundances across all samples.
The method is label free but provides precise quantita-
tion of the abundance of different proteins in the complex
mixture. For each fraction, a list of proteins using the
international protein index (IPI) identification system is
provided with information about its abundance. Because
the mass of the pseudopodia is only a small fraction of
that of the whole cell, our purification scheme does not
permit the analysis of pseudopodia/cell-body equivalents.
Hence, assuming that the global protein density is equal
in both sub cellular domains, equivalent amounts of
pseudopodia and cell-body lysate are compared. The ana-
lysis thus yields information regarding the relative abun-
dance of proteins. Proteins that are either enriched or
depleted in the pseudopodia will be identified through
comparison of protein densities in pseudopodia and cell-
body. One important assumption we make is that protein
density is constant throughout the cell.
Proteomic and phosphoproteomic datasets
The proteomic analysis has been performed using a
novel mass spectrometry method that enables the rapid
characterization of complex peptide mixtures without
bias to highly abundant proteins [26]. For the proteomic
analysis equal amount (10μg) of pseudopod and cell-
body fraction were analyzed by mass spectrometer. The
proteomic dataset consists of 2103 peptides, that are all
identified in the 18 different mass-spectrometry runs,
with a total sum of 12759 peptide counts. For the phos-
phoproteomic analysis, 1 mg of pseudopod and body ly-
sates were digested and subjected to phosphopeptide
analysis using TiO2 affinity purification as previously de-
scribed [22], resulting in 2074 phosphorylated peptides.
Provided that the proteomic and phosphoproteomic ana-
lyses are independent, and have different sensitivities,
their identification output is not necessarily the same.
Additional files
Additional file 1:Timelapse of pseudopodial extension through the
filter pores for PDGF and LPA-mediated NIH 3 T3 chemotaxis and
fibronectin-mediated haptotaxis. Bar = 50μm.
Additional file 2:Supplementary figures and legends.
Additional file 3:Identification information of Proteomic dataset.
The ensemble gene names of the identified proteins are listed in column
1, and the spectral counts in column 2, a measure that determines the
relative protein amounts. Column 4 shows the percentage of protein
sequence coverage, indicating the percentage of the protein's sequence
represented by the peptides identified in the mass spectrometry run, and
in column 5 is the total number of peptides identified for each protein.
Additional file 4:Proteomic dataset.The ensemble gene names of
the identified proteins are listed in column 1, and their relative
enrichment ratios in each cell migration mode (Haptotaxis, LPA, PDGF) in
columns 2– 4. In the following columns a binary matrix indicates protein
localization (columns 5– 10), protein type (columns 11– 24), and signalling
pathways (columns 25:225). The last three columns (226– 228) contain the
p-values as determined by a ttest comparing the mean enrichment
values of the cell protrusion versus the mean enrichment values of the
cell body, for each cell migration mode (Haptotaxis, LPA, PDGF), under
the null-hypothesis that they are equal.
Additional file 5:Phosphoproteomic dataset. The ensemble gene
names of the identified phosphoproteins are listed in column 1, and their
relative enrichment ratios in each cell migration mode (Haptotaxis, LPA,
PDGF) in columns 2– 4. In the following columns a binary matrix indicates
protein localization (columns 5– 10), protein type (columns 11– 25), and
signalling pathways (columns 26:235). In column 236, the phosphorylated
peptide(s) with phosphorylation site annotation is provided. The index of
every phosphorylated aminoacid (Serine:S,Threonine:T,Tyrosine:Y) is
indicated in brackets for each peptide, together with the detected
change of its mass. The last three columns (237– 229) contain the p-
values as determined by a ttest comparing the mean enrichment values
of the cell protrusion versus the mean enrichment values of the cell
body, for each cell migration mode (Haptotaxis, LPA, PDGF), under the
null-hypothesis that they are equal.
Additional file 6:List of identified proteins and their
correspondence to selected canonical pathways related to cell
migration. A binary matrix indicates the ensemble gene names of the
proteomic dataset belonging to the manually selected cell migration
related canonical pathways according to IPA.
Additional file 7:List of identified phosphoproteins and their
correspondence to selected canonical pathways related to cell
migration.A binary matrix indicates the ensemble gene names of the
phosphoproteomic dataset belonging to the manually selected cell
migration related canonical pathways according to IPA.
Abbreviations
ECM: Extracellular matrix; RTK: Receptor tyrosine kinase; GPCR: G-coupled
protein receptors; PDGF: Platelet derived growth factor;
LPA: Lysophosphatidic acid.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Authors’ contributions
OP, KM and EF performed the biological and biochemical experiments. RA
provided the infrastructure for mass spectrometry and AS performed the
high-throughput experimental analysis of the cell lysates using mass
spectrometry. GF did the data analysis with DI and OP as advisors. GF, DI
and OP wrote the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final
manuscript.
Acknowledgements
This research was supported by an iPhD SystemsX grant to Olivier Pertz and
Dagmar Iber, and by a Swiss National Science Foundation grant to Olivier
Pertz. We are grateful to Ioannis Xenarios, Anne Niknejad and Mark Ibberson
for valuable input on the project.
Author details
1ETH Zurich, D-BSSE, Mattenstrasse 26, CH-4058 Basel, Switzerland.2University
of Basel, Biozentrum, Klingelbergstrasse 50/70, CH-4056 Basel, Switzerland.
3Department Biomedicine, University of Basel, Mattenstrasse 28, CH-4058
Basel, Switzerland. 4ETH Zurich, Department of Biology, Institute of Molecular
Systems Biology, Wolfgang-Pauli-Strasse 16, CH-8093 Zurich, Switzerland.
5University of Zurich, Faculty of Science, Zurich, Switzerland.
Received: 19 December 2013 Accepted: 25 April 2014
Published: 1 May 2014
References
1. Britten RJ, Davidson EH: Gene regulation for higher cells: a theory.Science
1969, 165:349– 357.
Fengos et al. Proteome Science2014, 12:23 Page 17 of 18
http://www.proteomesci.com/content/12/1/23
2. Beato M: Gene regulation by steroid hormones.In Gene Expression.
Springer; 1993:43– 75.
3. Hunter T: Protein kinases and phosphatases: the yin and yang of protein
phosphorylation and signaling.Cell 1995, 80:225– 236.
4. Firtel RA, Chung CY: The molecular genetics of chemotaxis: sensing and
responding to chemoattractant gradients.Bioessays 2000, 22:603– 615.
5. Janetopoulos C, Firtel RA: Directional sensing during chemotaxis.FEBS Lett
2008, 582:2075– 2085.
6. Galbraith CG, Yamada KM, Galbraith JA: Polymerizing actin fibers position
integrins primed to probe for adhesion sites.Sci Signal 2007, 315:992.
7. Wehrle-Haller B, Imhof BA: Actin, microtubules and focal adhesion
dynamics during cell migration.Int J Biochem Cell Biol2003, 35:39.
8. Wittmann T, Waterman-Storer CM: Cell motility: can Rho GTPases and
microtubules point the way?J Cell Sci2001, 114:3795– 3803.
9. Caswell PT, Norman JC: Integrin trafficking and the control of cell
migration. Traffic 2006, 7:14– 21.
10. Cho SY, Klemke RL: Purification of pseudopodia from polarized cells
reveals redistribution and activation of Rac through assembly of a CAS/
Crk scaffold. J Cell Biol2002, 156:725– 736.
11. Pertz OC, Wang Y, Yang F, Wang W, Gay LJ, Gristenko MA, Clauss TR,
Anderson DJ, Liu T, Auberry KJ:Spatial mapping of the neurite and soma
proteomes reveals a functional Cdc42/Rac regulatory network.Proc Natl
Acad Sci 2008, 105:1931– 1936.
12. Hood JD, Cheresh DA: Role of integrins in cell invasion and migration.
Nat Rev Cancer2002, 2:91– 100.
13. Grammer TC, Blenis J:Evidence for MEK-independent pathways regulating the
prolonged activation oft h eE R K - M A Pk i n a s e s .Oncogene1997, 14:1635– 1642.
14. Daaka Y: Mitogenic action of LPA in prostate.Biochim Biophys Acta (BBA)-Mol
Cell Biol Lipids2002, 1582:265– 269.
15. Diella F, Cameron S, Gemünd C, Linding R, Via A, Kuster B, Sicheritz-Ponten
T, Blom N, Gibson TJ:Phospho. ELM: a database of experimentally verified
phosphorylation sites in eukaryotic proteins.BMC Bioinforma 2004, 5:79.
16. Galvez T, Teruel MN, Do Heo W, Jones JT, Kim ML, Liou J, Myers JW, Meyer
T: siRNA screen of the human signaling proteome identifies the PtdIns
(3, 4, 5) P.Genome Biol 2007, 8:R142.
17. Jensen LJ, Kuhn M, StarkM, Chaffron S, Creevey C, Muller J, Doerks T, Julien P,
Roth A, Simonovic M:STRING 8-a global view on proteins and their functional
interactions in 630 organisms.Nucleic Acids Res2009, 37:D412– D416.
18. Rabilloud T: Membrane proteins and proteomics: love is possible, but so
difficult. Electrophoresis 2009, 30:S174– S180.
19. Maeder CI, Hink MA, Kinkhabwala A, Mayr R, Bastiaens PI, Knop M:Spatial
regulation of Fus3 MAP kinase activity through a reaction–diffusion
mechanism in yeast pheromone signalling.Nat Cell Biol2007, 9:1319– 1326.
20. Machacek M, Hodgson L, Welch C, Elliott H, Pertz O, Nalbant P, Abell A,
Johnson GL, Hahn KM, Danuser G:Coordination of Rho GTPase activities
during cell protrusion.Nature 2009, 461:99– 103.
21. Pertz O, Hodgson L, Klemke RL, Hahn KM:Spatiotemporal dynamics of
RhoA activity in migrating cells.Nature 2006, 440:1069– 1072.
22. Bodenmiller B, Mueller LN, Mueller M, Domon B, Aebersold R:Reproducible
isolation of distinct, overlapping segments of the phosphoproteome.
Nat Methods 2007, 4:231– 237.
23. Schmidt A, Beck M, Malmström J, Lam H, Claassen M, Campbell D,
Aebersold R: Absolute quantification of microbial proteomes at different
states by directed mass spectrometry.Mol Syst Biol2011, 7:510.
24. Keller A, Nesvizhskii AI, Kolker E, Aebersold R:Empirical statistical model to
estimate the accuracy of peptide identifications made by MS/MS and
database search. Anal Chem 2002, 74:5383– 5392.
25. Nesvizhskii AI, Keller A, Kolker E, Aebersold R:A statistical model for
identifying proteins by tandem mass spectrometry.Anal Chem 2003,
75:4646– 4658.
26. Schmidt A, Gehlenborg N, Bodenmiller B, Mueller LN, Campbell D, Mueller
M, Aebersold R, Domon B:An integrated, directed mass spectrometric
approach for in-depth characterization of complex peptide mixtures.
Mol Cell Proteomics2008, 7:2138– 2150.
doi:10.1186/1477-5956-12-23
Cite this article as:Fengos et al.: Spatial proteomic and phospho-
proteomic organization in three prototypical cell migration modes.
Proteome Science 2014 12:23.
Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of: 
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at 
www.biomedcentral.com/submit
Fengos et al. Proteome Science2014, 12:23 Page 18 of 18
http://www.proteomesci.com/content/12/1/23