Developmental Cell
Article
GEF-H1 Modulates Localized RhoA Activation
during Cytokinesis under the Control of Mitotic
Kinases
Jo¨ rg Birkenfeld,1,4 Perihan Nalbant,1 Benjamin P. Bohl,1 Olivier Pertz,2 Klaus M. Hahn,3 and Gary M. Bokoch1,*
1 Departments of Immunology and Cell Biology, The Scripps Research Institute, 10550 North Torrey Pines Road,
La Jolla, CA 92037, USA
2 Department of Pathology and Moores Cancer Center, Basic Science Building, University of California, San Diego,
9500 Gilman Drive, MC 0612, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA
3 Department of Pharmacology, University of North Carolina, CB7365, Mary Ellen Jones Building, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA
4 Present address: Institut fu¨ r Biochemie und Molekularbiologie II, Klinikum der Heinrich-Heine-Universita¨ t, Universita¨ tsstr. 1,
D-40225 Du¨ sseldorf, Germany.
*Correspondence: bokoch@scripps.edu
DOI 10.1016/j.devcel.2007.03.014
SUMMARY
Formation of the mitotic cleavage furrow is de-
pendent upon both microtubules and activity
of the small GTPase RhoA. GEF-H1 is a micro-
tubule-regulated exchange factor that couples
microtubule dynamics to RhoA activation.
GEF-H1 localized to the mitotic apparatus in
HeLa cells, particularly at the tips of cortical mi-
crotubules and the midbody, and perturbation
of GEF-H1 function induced mitotic aberrations,
including asymmetric furrowing, membrane
blebbing, and impaired cytokinesis. The mitotic
kinases Aurora A/B and Cdk1/Cyclin B phos-
phorylate GEF-H1, thereby inhibiting GEF-H1
catalytic activity. Dephosphorylation of GEF-H1
occurs just prior to cytokinesis, accompanied
by GEF-H1-dependent GTP loading on RhoA.
Using a live cell biosensor, we demonstrate dis-
tinct roles for GEF-H1 and Ect2 in regulating Rho
activity in the cleavage furrow, with GEF-H1 cat-
alyzing Rho activation in response to Ect2-
dependent localization and initiation of cell
cleavage. Our results identify a GEF-H1-
dependent mechanism to modulate localized
RhoA activation during cytokinesis under the
control of mitotic kinases.
INTRODUCTION
GEF-H1 and its mouse homolog Lfc represent novel mem-
bers of the Dbl family of guanine nucleotide exchange fac-
tors (GEFs) with RhoA-speciﬁc enzymatic activity (Krendel
et al., 2002; Ren et al., 1998). Subcellular localization anal-
ysis demonstrated that GEF-H1 is associated with micro-
tubules (MTs), and that MT depolymerization leads to
GEF-H1 activation, accompanied by a RhoA-dependent
reorganization of the actin cytoskeleton ( Krendel et al.,
2002). Thus, GEF-H1 regulation by MTs provides a
novel mechanism to link RhoA-controlled cellular activities
to MT depolymerization. Because GEF-H1 activity is de-
pendent on the polymerization state of MTs, we specu-
lated that the extensive MT rearrangements that occur
during mitosis might affect GEF-H1 and, thereby, RhoA
signaling.
The small GTPase RhoA plays a central role in regulat-
ing the formation of the actomyosin cleavage furrow (CF)
during cell division. When RhoA is depleted genetically
or through biochemical means, formation of the CF is pre-
vented (Drechsel et al., 1997; Kishi et al., 1993; O’Connell
et al., 1999). Moreover, the localization of RhoA activity to
a precisely bounded zone seems to be critical for forma-
tion of the contractile apparatus necessary for cell cleav-
age (Bement et al., 2005). CF formation thus results from
the local activation of RhoA in many cell types ( Piekny
et al., 2005 ). However, in Rat-1 ( Yoshizaki et al., 2004 )
and Rat-2 ( Bakal et al., 2005 ) cells, inhibition of RhoA
does not prevent cytokinesis, but appears to exert effects
on early mitotic spindle formation. Thus, the requirements
for RhoA during cytokinesis appear to vary from cell type
to cell type.
Studies manipulating the position or the integrity of the
mitotic spindle have indicated that spindle MTs send CF
initiation signals to the cell cortex to regulate the assembly
and function of the contractile ring (Alsop and Zhang,
2004; Rappaport, 1997). In particular, astral MTs emanat-
ing from the spindle poles, and antiparallel MT bundles be-
tween separating chromosomes (i.e., the midzone spin-
dle), have crucial roles in activating cortical regions,
most likely by controlling localized activation of RhoA at
the cell equator (D’Avino et al., 2005; Glotzer, 2004; Man-
dato et al., 2000). However, the MT-regulated signals and
mechanistic principles underlying RhoA activation during
cytokinesis are poorly understood.
Because small GTPase activation requires the action of
speciﬁc GEFs, it is conceivable that MT signaling may im-
pinge on Rho-selective GEFs. Ect2 represents such an
Developmental Cell 12, 699–712, May 2007 ª2007 Elsevier Inc. 699
i An update to this article is included at the end
activator for Rho GTPases that has been implicated in cell
division (Tatsumoto et al., 1999 ). There is accumulating
evidence that the primary role of Ect2 is to ensure the lo-
calized concentration of RhoA at the CF ( Kamijo et al.,
2006; Nishimura and Yonemura, 2006; Yuce et al.,
2005). However, whether Ect2 catalytic activity is required
to activate RhoA during cytokinesis in mammalian cells
remains unclear.
Cdk1/Cyclin B and Aurora kinases have emerged as
major regulators of mitotic progression through their abil-
ity to phosphorylate numerous critical mitotic modulators
(Ferrari, 2006; Nigg, 1995, 2001). Several lines of evidence
have implicated mitotic kinases in the control of RhoA
activity during cell division. Cdk1/Cyclin B modulates
the activity of Ect2 during cytokinesis (Hara et al., 2006;
Niiya et al., 2006), whereas phosphorylation by Aurora B
is required to confer RhoA-speciﬁc GAP activity to
MgcRacGAP in the same context (Minoshima et al.,
2003). In the present work, we show that GEF-H1 is phos-
phorylated during mitosis by both Aurora A/B and Cdk1/
Cyclin B, and that phosphorylation of GEF-H1 during M
phase coincides with reduced catalytic activity. GEF-H1
dephosphorylation occurs at the onset of cytokinesis,
and is accompanied by GEF-H1-dependent GTP loading
on RhoA. Perturbation of endogenous GEF-H1 by both
gene knockdown and overexpression of inhibitory mu-
tants caused impairment of HeLa cell cytokinesis. Exami-
nation of RhoA activation dynamics in HeLa cells stably
expressing a ﬂuorescent resonance energy transfer
(FRET)-based RhoA biosensor indicates an important reg-
ulatory role for GEF-H1 in the activation of RhoA during
cytokinesis.
RESULTS
GEF-H1 Subcellular Distribution Correlates
with CF Formation
Using afﬁnity-puriﬁed antibodies speciﬁc for GEF-H1
(Zenke et al., 2004 ), we observed that GEF-H1 accumu-
lates at the mitotic spindle during cell division (see
Figure S1A in the Supplemental Data available with this
article online). Detailed analysis of the subcellular distribu-
tion of GEF-H1 during mitosis in asynchronous HeLa cells
revealed that a substantial fraction of GEF-H1 localizes to
the spindle apparatus throughout all stages of mitosis
(Figure 1A). During telophase, a subset of GEF-H1 immu-
noreactivity was enriched in a narrow equatorial band
comprised of aligned short segments at sites of CF forma-
tion, most likely representing overlapping plus ends of
equatorial astral MTs (Figure 1A, telophase I). With the fur-
row advancing inward, GEF-H1 segments became more
condensed into a ring-like structure encompassing the
Figure 1. Subcellular Localization of Endogenous GEF-H1
during Mitosis
(A) GEF-H1 is associated with the spindle apparatus throughout mito-
sis. Asynchronous HeLa cells were ﬁxed with methanol/acetone and
quadruple-stained for endogenous GEF-H1 (red channel), tubulin
(green channel), actin (blue channel), and DNA (yellow). The scale
bar represents 20mm.
(B) GEF-H1 localizes to the tips of cortical MTs. Asynchronous HeLa
cells were extracted for soluble tubulin, ﬁxed as above, and stained us-
ing anti-pGEF-H1 (green) and anti-tubulin (red) antibodies or CREST se-
rum. Boxed regions are shown in higher magniﬁcation. Confocal micro-
graphs (single slicesof 0.54mm thickness) were analyzed for colocalized
data points (displayed as white overlays in the colocalization panel).
(C) During cytokinesis, GEF-H1 forms an equatorial ring encompassed
by contractile actin structures. Confocal microscopy of mitotic HeLa
cells stained with anti-GEF-H1 (green) and anti-actin (red) antibodies.
Indicated regions (white arrows) are shown in higher magniﬁcation in
the inserts.
Developmental Cell
GEF-H1 Regulates Rho Activity in HeLa Cell Mitosis
700 Developmental Cell 12, 699–712, May 2007 ª2007 Elsevier Inc.
midzone (Figure 1A, telophase II). Interestingly, our GEF-
H1 antibodies did not stain the central spindle, suggesting
that GEF-H1 distribution is restricted to astral and kineto-
chore MTs (see alsoFigure 1B). Further examination using
laser scanning confocal microscopy showed that GEF-H1
immunoreactivity is enriched at the tips of spindle
MTs (Figure 1B, tubulin panels; Figures S1 C and S1D).
We noticed that MT tip-localized GEF-H1 was more efﬁ-
ciently detected by a phosphorylation-speciﬁc GEF-H1
antibody (Figure 1 B, pGEF-H1 panels) than by a non-
phospho-GEF-H1 antibody (Figure S1C), possibly due to
differences in epitope accessibility upon phosphorylation
(see below). To visualize GEF-H1 distribution relative to
centromeres, we stained metaphase and telophase cells
with human CREST serum, which detects the centromere
protein CENP-A (Figure 1B, CREST panels). In metaphase
cells, GEF-H1-positive dots at MTs aligned juxtaposed to
the centromeres. Later in telophase, when the chromo-
somes moved pole-ward, GEF-H1 dots became com-
pacted into a single band in the midzone region.
Double-labeling experiments revealed that GEF-H1 and
actin form a double-ring structure (Figure 1C, merge chan-
nel) composed of an internal GEF-H1 immunoreactive cir-
cle (Figure 1C, green channel) associated with the tubulin
cytoskeleton and aligned with the inner face of the con-
tractile actomyosin ring ( Figure 1 C, red channel). To-
gether, these results indicate that GEF-H1 localizes to
structures critical for CF formation and ingression,
namely, cortical MTs and the midbody region.
Perturbation of GEF-H1 Function Causes Defects
in Cytokinesis
If GEF-H1 is an important regulator of contractile ring for-
mation and cytokinesis, then perturbation of endogenous
GEF-H1 function should increase the extent of multinu-
cleation as an indicator of failed cytokinesis. Indeed,
siRNA-mediated depletion of endogenous GEF-H1 signif-
icantly increased the formation of multinucleated cells
(18.9% ± 6.4%) compared with control (CTRL) siRNA-
transfected cells (8.4% ± 3.7%) (Figure 2A). As a positive
control for multinucleation, we also depleted cells of Ect2:
similar to previously published studies ( Kim et al., 2005),
the number of nuclei was markedly increased in Ect2
siRNA-treated cells (55% ± 5.3%; see alsoSupplemental
Data).
To corroborate the siRNA depletion data, we analyzed
the consequences of overexpression of GEF-H1 inhibitory
mutants on cell division.Figure 2B shows that overexpres-
sion of a non-MT-associated, enzymatically inactive GEF-
H1 mutant (EGFP-GEF-H1C53R+DHmut) had a greater
effect on multinucleation than an MT-associated domi-
nant-negative (d/n) EGFP-GEF-H1DH mut construct
(26.9% ± 4.9% versus 12.6% ± 2.4%, compared to
3.8% ± 1.1% for EGFP alone-expressing cells). These ﬁnd-
ings are consistent with data showing that d/n GEF-H1 mu-
tants defective in MT binding block endogenous RhoA
activation more efﬁciently than do MT-bound forms,
supporting the idea that endogenous GEF-H1 is most ac-
tive when released from the tubulin cytoskeleton (Krendel
Figure 2. Multinucleation Caused by
GEF-H1 Perturbation
(A) Multinucleated cells were found at 48 hr
after transfection with GEF-H1 siRNA. Values
shown are the means from four independent
experiments in which over 1000 cells were
counted per experiment; error bars indicate
±SEM. For statistical analysis, all data were
evaluated by two-tailed Student’s t test. Values
signiﬁcantly different from controls (p% 0.01)
are marked with an asterisk. Cells harboring
more than one nucleus are indicated by an as-
terisk in the micrograph. The scale bar repre-
sents 20mm.
(B) Overexpression of GEF-H1 inhibitory mu-
tants induced multinucleation. The number of
multinucleated cells as a percentage of the
total cell population expressing the EGFP-
tagged constructs was quantiﬁed in HeLa cells
48 hr after transfection. A minimum of 100 cells
from each of three independent experiments
was scored for each construct. Values signiﬁ-
cantly different from EGFP-expressing cells
are marked with one (p%0.01) or two asterisks
(p % 0.001). Micrographs on the right illustrate
expression patterns of the different constructs.
Developmental Cell 12, 699–712, May 2007 ª2007 Elsevier Inc. 701
Developmental Cell
GEF-H1 Regulates Rho Activity in HeLa Cell Mitosis
et al., 2002; Zenke et al., 2004). Thus, both multinucleation
caused by ablation of endogenous GEF-H1 and via over-
expression of GEF-H1 inhibitory mutants suggest that
perturbation of GEF-H1 impairs cytokinesis.
GEF-H1 Depletion Induces Membrane Instability
and Ectopic Furrowing during Cytokinesis
Prolonged synchronization with nocodazole (noc) was fre-
quently associated with cell death in GEF-H1 siRNA-
treated cells ( Figure S2 B). Under milder conditions in
which the apoptotic phenotype was attenuated (see Ex-
perimental Procedures), we still observed that more cells
displayed cortical aberrations during early mitotic stages
when exposed to GEF-H1 siRNA (Figure 3 B), although
the majority of cells progressed to later stages of mitosis,
and chromosome alignment, segregation, and furrow ini-
tiation appeared normal in both GEF-H1- and control-
depleted cells (Figure S8; Movies S1–S3). As the furrow
started to constrict, about two thirds of the progressing
GEF-H1-depleted cells (i.e., 40.8% of all cells) exhibited
membrane aberrations, including excessive cortical bleb-
bing and the formation of unstable ectopic furrows ( Fig-
ures 3 C–3E; Movie S2 ). Interestingly, uncoordinated
furrowing and plasma membrane instabilities did not
necessarily culminate in cytokinesis failure. Instead, ec-
topic furrows regressed or joined with a robust central fur-
row, while other uncoordinated membrane activities along
the cortex abrogated upon daughter cell separation
(24.8% ± 4.7%; Figure 3C).
In about 16% ± 6% of GEF-H1-depleted cells, abnormal
membrane activities could not be compensated and
caused impairment of daughter cell abscission and sepa-
ration, leading to the formation of multinucleated cells (20
out of 144 cells;Figure 3D; Movie S3) or total collapse of
the daughter cells (3 out of 144 cells; Figure 3E). In con-
trast, the vast majority of cells expressing control siRNA
did not exhibit membrane instabilities, and passed nor-
mally through cell division ( Figure 3 A). Although some
blebbing occurred in control cells, it was much less pro-
nounced than observed upon GEF-H1 ablation, and was
usually conﬁned to the cell poles. Downregulation of
Ect2 induced severe cytokinetic defects, where 38.4% ±
1% (n = 54 cells) of the cells analyzed were not able to per-
form cleavage (data not shown). Multinucleation in this
case, however, was not associated with cortical instabil-
ities but solely with defects in CF formation and ingression
Figure 3. Downregulation of GEF-H1 Causes Mitotic Aberrations
Distribution of mitotic phenotypes in GEF-H1- (GEF-H1 siRNA) or control siRNA- (CTRL siRNA) transfected cells. Classiﬁcation of phenotypes: (A)
regular cytokinesis; (B) collapsing: cortical hyperactivity during metaphase, ﬁnally collapsing; (C) instability: membranous aberrations arou nd the
CF without impairment of cytokinesis; (D and E) failed cytokinesis: membranous aberrations during cytokinesis that are not compensated and
gave rise to cytokinesis failure. Values are given as percentage of total cells, with error bars indicating ±SEM. Actual numbers are indicated. In 4 in-
dependent experiments, a total of 144 GEF-H1-depleted and 114 control-depleted cells were scored (*p % 0.05; **p % 0.005; ***p % 0.0005).
702 Developmental Cell 12, 699–712, May 2007 ª2007 Elsevier Inc.
Developmental Cell
GEF-H1 Regulates Rho Activity in HeLa Cell Mitosis
(Figure S3). Overall, these results indicate distinct roles for
Ect2 and GEF-H1 in cytokinesis and suggest that Ect2 is
essential for early events occurring during CF induction,
whereas GEF-H1 activity is important to coordinate corti-
cal activities during CF ingression.
GEF-H1 Is Phosphorylated Early in Mitosis
by Aurora A Kinase
Using phospho-speciﬁc antibodies raised against the
pSer885 epitope, we observed high levels of endogenous
phospho-GEF-H1 in lysates from noc-arrested mitotic
HeLa cells (Figure 4A, upper panel), with a concomitant in-
crease in 14-3-3 binding (Figure S5B). In contrast, GEF-H1
phosphorylation and 14-3-3 binding were nearly unde-
tectable in asynchronous HeLa cell lysates. When syn-
chronized HeLa cells were allowed to progress through
mitosis, a dramatic decrease in the amount of phosphor-
ylated GEF-H1 was observed at 90 min after release,
when the majority of cells entered telophase and under-
went cytokinesis ( Gohla et al., 2005 )( Figure 4 A, lower
panel). Dephosphorylation of GEF-H1 coincided with pro-
teolysis of Cyclin B1, which starts at metaphase/ana-
phase and is required for M phase exit ( Clute and Pines,
1999). Phosphorylation of GEF-H1 at Ser885 was no longer
detectable 180 min after release from the noc block, when
most of the cells were in G1 phase. These results demon-
strate that GEF-H1 is phosphorylated early during mitosis
and undergoes speciﬁc dephosphorylation prior to the
ﬁnal stages of cell division.
Examination of the subcellular distribution of Ser 885-
phosphorylated GEF-H1 in mitotic cells showed that im-
munoreactivity speciﬁcally accumulated at the polar re-
gions of the spindle apparatus ( Figure 4B; Figure S4A).
This suggested that GEF-H1 might be phosphorylated
by kinases associated with centrosomal structures such
as Aurora A ( Andrews et al., 2003 ). As shown in
Figure 4C, phospho-GEF-H1 indeed accumulated in Au-
rora A-positive double spots, which correspond to the du-
plicated centrosomes. In contrast, these structures were
poorly stained using non-phospho-GEF-H1 antibody, per-
haps due to steric hindrance of antibody access. We
therefore veriﬁed the presence of GEF-H1 in centrosomes
after EGFP-GEF-H1 plasmid microinjection into thymi-
dine-synchronized HeLa cells (Figure 4D). Because phos-
pho-GEF-H1 antibodies and EGFP-GEF-H1 minimally
stained centrosomes of interphase cells (data not shown),
this suggests that GEF-H1 is recruited to centrosomes
during early mitotic events, perhaps coincident with
phosphorylation by Aurora A.
We next tested whether endogenous Aurora A kinase
and GEF-H1 form a complex in live cells. Immunoprecipi-
tation of GEF-H1 resulted in coprecipitation of Aurora A
kinase (Figure 4E), whereas no coprecipitation was ob-
served from GEF-H1-depleted cell lysates or with control
IgG. In addition, Ser 885 phosphorylation of GEF-H1
in vivo was abolished by blocking the activities of the cen-
trosomal kinases Aurora A and the Cdk1/Cyclin B complex
but not by PKA or GSK3b (Figure 5), indicating that GEF-H1
phosphorylation during mitosis involves the mitotic
kinases Aurora A/B and Cdk1/Cyclin B. We also found
that inhibition of Aurora B, a paralog of Aurora A that local-
izes to centromeres, abolished GEF-H1 phosphorylation
later in mitosis (see Figure S4D). In vitro kinase assays
showed that Aurora A directly phosphorylates GEF-H1 at
Ser885, whereas Cdk1/Cyclin B (or Aurora B) surprisingly
modiﬁed Ser959 instead (Figures S4C and S4D). Together,
these results indicate speciﬁc interactions between Aurora
A and GEF-H1 during cell division and identify the C termi-
nus as the major phosphoacceptor region on GEF-H1.
GEF-H1 Is Activated by Dephosphorylation
to Promote GTP Loading on RhoA
We examined whether phosphorylation could regulate the
enzymatic activity of GEF-H1 in mitotic cells. Using Caly-
culin A, a cell-permeable inhibitor of protein phospha-
tases, we increased the levels of phosphorylated EGFP-
GEF-H1 in transfected cells ( Figure 6 A). EGFP-GEF-H1
immunoprecipitates from these cells were then treated
with calf intestinal phosphatase (CIP) ± phosphatase in-
hibitors, and used to catalyze the exchange of GDP for
[35S]GTPgS on RhoA. While immunoprecipitates with
high amounts of phospho-GEF-H1 did not catalyze nucle-
otide exchange on RhoA ( Figure 6 B, CIP+Inh), the de-
phosphorylation of GEF-H1 coincided with a dramatic in-
crease in nucleotide exchange activity (Figure 6B, CIP),
similar to the maximum exchange obtainable.
To determine whether phosphorylation of GEF-H1 at
Ser885 and/or Ser959 regulated GEF-H1 activity in the con-
text of mitosis, we expressed GEF-H1 phosphorylation
mutants in metaphase-synchronized HeLa cells and mea-
sured GTP-bound RhoA. The increase in GTP-RhoA ob-
served in mitotic lysates expressing wild-type GEF-H1
(compare with EGFP control) was used as a reference
(Figure 6 C, 100%). Overexpression of the phosphomi-
metic S885D single mutant signiﬁcantly increased GTP-
RhoA as compared to cells expressing EGFP alone,
whereas the S959D single mutant also increased GTP-
RhoA but was somewhat less active (Figure 6C). Phos-
phorylation-deﬁcient GEF-H1 S885A and S959A mutants
also induced RhoA activation similar to WT GEF-H1
(Figure S5C). In contrast, overexpression of the phospho-
mimetic double mutant SS885/959DD clearly did not sig-
niﬁcantly increase GTP-RhoA over control levels. These
data suggest that both Aurora A and Cdk1/Cyclin B-medi-
ated phosphorylation are necessary for full negative regu-
lation of GEF-H1 activity during early stages of mitosis.
The phosphorylation of Ser885 in GEF-H1 is known to in-
duce binding of 14-3-3 protein to GEF-H1 ( Zenke et al.,
2004), and we observed that 14-3-3 was associated with
GEF-H1 in mitotic cell lysates ( Figure S5B). Thus, part of
the inhibitory effect of Aurora A-induced Ser885 phosphor-
ylation in vivo may result from the stimulation of 14-3-3
binding to GEF-H1.
GEF-H1 Depletion Alters RhoA Activation Dynamics
during Cytokinesis in Live Cells
GEF-H1 is not phosphorylated and therefore most proba-
bly exists as an active form during telophase, a time point
Developmental Cell 12, 699–712, May 2007 ª2007 Elsevier Inc. 703
Developmental Cell
GEF-H1 Regulates Rho Activity in HeLa Cell Mitosis
704 Developmental Cell 12, 699–712, May 2007 ª2007 Elsevier Inc.
Developmental Cell
GEF-H1 Regulates Rho Activity in HeLa Cell Mitosis
when mitotic cells form the CF in a RhoA-dependent man-
ner. To test whether GEF-H1 is involved in the activation of
RhoA in telophase, we depleted HeLa cells of endogenous
GEF-H1 and Ect2 using siRNA. Similar to cells in inter-
phase (Figure S6B), GEF-H1 expression in mitotic cells
was suppressed by approximately 79% (±15, 8%), while
Ect2 siRNA-induced knockdown was nearly complete,
with 4% (±3, 4%) protein expression remaining (Figure 7A,
graph). Determination of GTP-RhoA accumulation in syn-
chronized, siRNA-treated cells showed that control
siRNA-treated cells exhibited increased GTP-bound
RhoA during telophase (Figures 7A and 7B, CTRL siRNA).
Depletion of Ect2 did not alter GTP-RhoA formation during
telophase (Ect2 siRNA), which was surprising considering
the known requirement for Ect2 to localize RhoA to the
equatorial cortex prior to CF ingression. In contrast,
GEF-H1 depletion led to a strong reduction in the amount
of activated RhoA during telophase, while RhoA activation
remained largely unaffected during prophase and meta-
phase (GEF-H1 siRNA). However, for both GEF-H1- and
Ect2-ablated cells, high levels of RhoA activation were de-
tected at 180 min, further suggesting hampered exit from
mitosis. Taken together, these data indicate that GEF-H1
is involved in the activation of RhoA during cytokinesis.
To test the hypothesis that GEF-H1-induced mitotic ab-
errations involve perturbed RhoA activation, we generated
cells stably expressing a single-chain FRET-based bio-
sensor that responds to GTP loading on RhoA (Pertz
et al., 2006)( Figure 7C). Analogous to endogenous RhoA
in trichloroacetic acid (TCA)-ﬁxed cells ( Yonemura et al.,
2004), CFP ﬂuorescence of the biosensor concentrates
at the equatorial cortex at the onset of furrowing
(Figure 7D, CFP panel, anaphase) and during membrane
ingression (telophase I + II), indicating that it likely reﬂects
regulation of endogenous RhoA. We examined spatiotem-
poral changes in the activity of HeLa cell RhoA during cy-
tokinesis (Figure 7E; Figure S10). Images were taken from
biosensor-expressing cells that entered anaphase, as evi-
denced by initiation of chromosome separation. The emis-
sion ratio FRET/CFP was used to represent RhoA activa-
tion, as described (Pertz et al., 2006 ). In control cells,
activated RhoA was found to accumulate at the equatorial
cortex during anaphase ( Figure 7E, CTRL siRNA, FRET
panel, time point 0). As furrowing progressed, RhoA activ-
ity increased in the CF, reaching a peak level in the late
phase of cytokinesis when the midbody matrix was
formed and daughter cells started to separate (13 out of
15 cells analyzed) (here, time point 21.42). In cells treated
with GEF-H1 siRNA, early cortical activation of RhoA was
not affected (Figure 7E, GEF-H1 siRNA, FRET panel, time
points 0–10.17). However, as constriction proceeded,
Figure 4. Association of GEF-H1 with Aurora A
(A) Upper panel: GEF-H1 is phosphorylated at the onset of mitosis. HeLa cells were incubated with 100 ng/ml noc for 16 hr. Rounded mitotic cells,
harvested by mechanical knockoff (mit.), and remaining adherent interphase cells (int.) were lysed and analyzed by immunoblotting with anti-pGEF-
H1 or anti-GEF-H1 antibodies. Lysates from asynchronous (async.) or Pak1-transfected (PAK1; pSer885 control) HeLa cells were used as controls.
Lower panel: dephosphorylation of GEF-H1 during telophase/cytokinesis. HeLa cells were synchronized in mitosis by thymidine and noc, collected
by knockoff, and replated on poly-L-lysine-coated culture dishes. Lysates were analyzed by anti-pGEF-H1 or anti-GEF-H1 immunoblotting at the
indicated time points. The degradation of Cyclin B was used as an additional marker for cell synchrony. 14-3-3z controls were included to conﬁrm
comparable protein loading.
(B) Immunolocalization of Ser885-phosphorylated GEF-H1 in mitotic cells. Asynchronous HeLa cells were ﬁxed and stained for GEF-H1 (red channel),
tubulin (green channel), and DNA (DAPI) as described in Figure 1.
(C) pGEF-H1 colocalizes with Aurora A in centrosomes. HeLa cells in prophase were costained for Aurora A (red channel) and either GEF-H1 or pGEF-
H1 (green channels). DNA was detected by DAPI staining. Yellow color (merged image) indicates colocalization of pGEF-H1 with Aurora A in centro-
somes.
(D) Centrosome localization of EGFP-GEF-H1. HeLa cells were microinjected with plasmid DNA encoding EGFP-GEF-H1 and analyzed by time-lapse
video ﬂuorescence microscopy. Arrows indicate the position of the centrosomes.
(E) GEF-H1 interacts with Aurora A in vivo. Immunoprecipitation of GEF-H1-depleted (GEF-H1 siRNA) or control-depleted (CTRL siRNA) mitotic
lysates with either anti-GEF-H1 antibodies or control IgG after DSP crosslinking. The resulting immunoprecipitates were isolated, separated on
SDS-PAGE, and immunoblotted with anti-Aurora A antibody. Lysate lanes shown represent 10% of input lysate. WB, western blot.
Figure 5. Phosphorylation of GEF-H1 by Mitotic Kinases
Aurora A and Cdk1/Cyclin B
Inhibition of Aurora kinases and Cdk1/Cyclin B abolish GEF-H1 phos-
phorylation during mitosis. Before adherence, harvested synchronized
HeLa cells were inhibitor treated for 15 min during release into fresh
culture medium (w/o nocodazole) supplemented with the same inhib-
itors (at denoted concentrations and speciﬁcities). Inhibitors used here
are speciﬁc for serine-threonine kinases that are either predicted by
the Scansite algorithm ( http://scansite.mit.edu) to phosphorylate
GEF-H1 (PKA, GSK3b; data not shown) or are required for the control
and timing of mitotic progression (Aurora A/B, Cdk1/Cyclin B) (Ferrari,
2006; Nigg, 2001). At the indicated times (after adherence), cells were
lysed and analyzed by anti-pGEF-H1 and anti-GEF-H1 immunoblot-
ting.
Developmental Cell 12, 699–712, May 2007 ª2007 Elsevier Inc. 705
Developmental Cell
GEF-H1 Regulates Rho Activity in HeLa Cell Mitosis
RhoA activation in the forming CF decreased. Of particular
interest, in 62% of the cells analyzed (8 out of 13), localized
RhoA activation was strongly diminished at late stages of
cytokinesis shortly before midbody formation, although
RhoA protein was still concentrated at sites of cleavage
as in control cells (CFP + FRET panels, time points
12.06–19.20). The loss of localized RhoA activation in
the CF was correlated with dramatic cortical blebbing
and aberrant membrane activities, as described (Figure 3)
(see also Figure S10).
In contrast, in Ect2-depleted cells, CFP ﬂuorescence of
the RhoA biosensor was no longer accumulated at equa-
torial sites of CF formation (Ect2 siRNA, CFP panels). In-
stead, the biosensor was randomly distributed along the
cell periphery, correlated with strong but unlocalized cor-
tical activation of RhoA throughout all stages of mitosis
analyzed (Ect2 siRNA, FRET panels) (5 out of 6 cells ana-
lyzed). RhoA activation in the CF was only marginal (FRET
panels, time points 19.20–22.24). Concomitantly, CF for-
mation and constriction was either markedly slowed
(Figure 7E, Ect2 siRNA, DIC panels) or incomplete and of-
ten resulted in regression of the CF and binucleated cells
(see Figure S10 , Ect2 siRNA, DIC panels; see also
Figure S3B). In combination with the pull-down activity as-
say data presented, these results demonstrate distinct
roles for GEF-H1 and Ect2 in RhoA activation during cyto-
kinesis. Whereas Ect2 appears to initially direct the local-
ization of RhoA protein to equatorial sites prior to CF for-
mation, GEF-H1 participates in GTP loading of RhoA
after furrowing has been induced.
Figure 6. Dephosphorylation Stimulates
GEF-H1 Enzymatic Activity
(A) Calyculin A induces phosphorylation of
GEF-H1 in vivo. HeLa cells were treated with
100 nM Calyculin A or DMSO for 45 min. The
amount of phospho-GEF-H1 in the different ly-
sates was analyzed by immunoblotting with
anti-pGEF-H1 antibodies.
(B) Increase of GEF-H1 guanine nucleotide ex-
change activity in vitro after dephosphoryla-
tion. EGFP-GEF-H1 immunoprecipitates from
Calyculin A-stimulated HeLa cells were treated
with calf intestine alkaline phosphatase (CIP) in
the presence (CIP+inh) or absence (CIP) of
phosphatase inhibitors and subjected to
in vitro GEF assays as inExperimental Proce-
dures. The level of nucleotide binding in the
presence of EDTA was set to 100%. pGEF-
H1 levels in the immunoprecipitates after CIP
treatment were analyzed by anti-pGEF-H1 im-
munoblotting (insert). Each value represents
the mean (±SEM) of three independent experi-
ments. The asterisks indicate values signiﬁ-
cantly different from EDTA controls (p%
0.0001).
(C) Effects of GEF-H1 derivatives on accumu-
lation of GTP-bound RhoA during mitosis.
HeLa cells were transfected with the indicated
EGFP-tagged expression vectors coding for
different GEF-H1 mutants or EGFP alone for
24 hr. Following a 15 hr synchronization pe-
riod with 100 ng/ml noc, cells were released
into fresh medium for 45 min prior to lysis.
Subsequently, the GTP-bound fraction of
RhoA was extracted from the lysates by
GST-RBD. The amount of RhoA bound to
GST-RBD (GTP-RhoA) and the level of RhoA
expression (total RhoA) in whole-cell lysates
were determined by immunoblotting using
anti-RhoA antibodies. RhoA activation was
expressed as percent activation relative to
the EGFP-GEF-H1 WT-transfected control
(set to 100%). Each data point represents
the mean (±SEM) of at least three indepen-
dent experiments. The asterisks indicate
values signiﬁcantly different from EGFP-
GEF-H1 WT controls (p % 0.01). The dashed line marks the level of GTP-RhoA in EGFP-expressing cells. All values were normalized for expres-
sion efﬁciency of the individual constructs (anti-EGFP immunoblotting) and total RhoA levels by densitometric analysis as in (A). PonceauS staining
was used to determine the amount of GST-RBD in the reaction.
706 Developmental Cell 12, 699–712, May 2007 ª2007 Elsevier Inc.
Developmental Cell
GEF-H1 Regulates Rho Activity in HeLa Cell Mitosis
DISCUSSION
GEF-H1 Localization May Link Cortical Activation
of RhoA to MTs
Microtubule-derived signals are important for RhoA trans-
location to and activation at the equatorial cortex to allow
positioned assembly and contraction of the actomyosin
CF (Bement et al., 2005 ). We have shown in this study
that GEF-H1 meets important requirements for a regulator
of RhoA activation at the cell cortex. First, GEF-H1 local-
izes to the tips of cortical MTs of the mitotic spindle,
thereby placing its catalytic activity in close proximity to
the cell cortex ( Figure 1). Second, as the mitotic spindle
becomes compressed by the ingressing cortex, short
GEF-H1 immunoreactive segments in the equatorial plane
adopt a condensed circular structure that is aligned with
the inner face of the actomyosin contractile ring. A similar
structure has been described inDrosophila that is made
up of GAP50C-PAV, linking the MT network with the acto-
myosin contractile ring through interaction with the Ect2
homolog Pbl ( Somers and Saint, 2003 ). GEF-H1 could
therefore represent another structural element to link
MTs with the cell cortex in mammalian cells.
GEF-H1 Is a Target of Aurora A and Cdk1/Cyclin B
Kinases during Early Mitosis
In the present work, we have established the mitotic ki-
nases Aurora A/B and Cdk1/Cyclin B as important regula-
tors of GEF-H1 activity during cell division. We identiﬁed
Ser885 of GEF-H1 as the principal phospho-acceptor site
for Aurora A ( Figure S4 B) and Ser 959 as the primary
Cdk1/Cyclin B GEF-H1 phosphorylation site. It is possible
that upon mitotic entry, phosphorylation by Cdk1/Cyclin B
induces a conformational change in the GEF-H1 C-termi-
nal regulatory domain allowing Aurora A to access and
phosphorylate Ser885, which would be otherwise masked
by structural constraints. Similar regulation has been
described for Ect2 in which prephosphorylation by Cdk1/
Cyclin B stimulated the association of Ect2 with Polo-like
kinase 1, likely by releasing Ect2 from intramolecular auto-
inhibitory interactions (Hara et al., 2006).
Reducing GEF-H1 phosphorylation by phosphatase
treatment resulted in increased guanine nucleotide ex-
change activity of WT GEF-H1 (Figure 6B). Consistently,
phosphomimetic Ser 885D/Ser959D double mutants of
GEF-H1 signiﬁcantly exhibited less RhoA activation in mi-
totic lysates (Figure 6C). We conclude that phosphoryla-
tion of GEF-H1 during cell division negatively regulates
its enzymatic activity. Our results do not address whether
phosphorylation might inhibit GEF-H1 activity by affecting
MT binding. However, the reduction in exchange activity
may involve 14-3-3 protein binding induced by Ser 885
phosphorylation (Zenke et al., 2004), as we have observed
association of 14-3-3 with GEF-H1 in mitotic cell immuno-
precipitates (Figure S5B). Because MT depolymerization
rapidly activates GEF-H1 to enhance cell contractility
(Krendel et al., 2002 ), GEF-H1-induced contractions
would likely interfere with cortical stabilization required
for mitotic cell rounding. Given that the interphase-mitosis
transition is accompanied by a rapid breakdown of the cy-
toplasmic MT network (Zhai et al., 1996), immediate inac-
tivation of GEF-H1 (by phosphorylation) may be necessary
for mitotic rounding.
GEF-H1 and Ect2 Mediate Different Aspects of RhoA
Activation during Cytokinesis
Ect2 is essential for RhoA localization at the equatorial
cortex, a prerequisite for CF formation and ingression
(Nishimura and Yonemura, 2006; Yuce et al., 2005). Inhibi-
tion of Ect2 often relies on overexpression of the inhibitory
N terminus (Saito et al., 2004), and mitotic cells expressing
Ect2-N show reduced RhoA activation during cytokinesis
(Kimura et al., 2000). It is not clear, however, whether the
reduced GTP loading on RhoA is due to interference with
Ect2 exchange activity, as opposed to the activation and/
or localization of other GEFs (e.g., GEF-H1) that might be
triggered by full-length Ect2. Accordingly, N-terminal mu-
tants of Ect2 that retained full GEF activity in vitro failed to
rescue the cytokinesis defect in cells depleted of endoge-
nous Ect2, suggesting that recruitment of additional regu-
lators apart from Ect2 exchange activity itself is crucial for
RhoA activation. We observed that siRNA-mediated de-
pletion of Ect2, while quite effective (see Figure S6), did
not interfere with bulk RhoA activation during telophase
(Figures 7A and 7B), also indicating that Ect2 does not di-
rectly activate RhoA. In clear contrast, while inhibition of
GEF-H1 did not affect recruitment of RhoA and other
regulators of cytokinesis to cortical regions (Figure 7 E;
Figure S7), ablation of GEF-H1 caused a strong decrease
in overall RhoA activation during telophase ( Figures 7 A
and 7E). Furthermore, we observe that the activation pro-
ﬁle of GEF-H1 during mitosis is inversely correlated to that
of Ect2. Whereas GEF-H1 is inhibited during early stages
of mitosis and is activated by dephosphorylation during
cytokinesis (this study), phosphorylation increases the
catalytic activity of Ect2 in vitro ( Tatsumoto et al., 1999 )
and in M phase cells ( Hara et al., 2006; Niiya et al.,
2006). This indicates distinct roles for GEF-H1 and Ect2
during cell division.
Inhibition of GEF-H1 Causes Late Defects in
Cytokinesis that Correlate with Decreased
RhoA Activation at the CF
Using time-lapse video microscopy, we identiﬁed aberra-
tions during CF formation in cells treated with GEF-H1-
speciﬁc RNAi duplexes. A majority of the GEF-H1-de-
pleted cells demonstrated loss of membrane stability in
the CF during late stages of mitosis after normal furrow in-
duction (Figures 3C and 3D). These perturbations did not
necessarily coincide with cytokinesis failure, as membra-
nous aberrations often subsided, and a compact midbody
bridge formed (Figure 3 C). The membrane phenotype
observed here is reminiscent of the depletion of either the
actin bundling protein anillin or the RhoA effector citron
kinase (D’Avino et al., 2004; Echard et al., 2004 ), whose
downregulation led to reduced cortical stability of the
cleavage plane and, later, the intercellular midbody bridge
(Echard et al., 2004). This resulted in the loss of membrane
Developmental Cell 12, 699–712, May 2007 ª2007 Elsevier Inc. 707
Developmental Cell
GEF-H1 Regulates Rho Activity in HeLa Cell Mitosis
Figure 7. GEF-H1 Modulates RhoA Activation in Mitotic Cells
(A and B) Cell cycle-associated changes in the level of GTP-RhoA after GEF-H1 depletion. Synchronized HeLa cells were subjected to GST-RBD pull-
down assays to detect GTP-RhoA during different stages of mitosis in lysates depleted of GEF-H1 or Ect2, or control-depleted lysates. A represen-
tative experiment is shown in (A). At least four independent assays for each condition were used to quantify the activation proﬁle of RhoA as in
708 Developmental Cell 12, 699–712, May 2007 ª2007 Elsevier Inc.
Developmental Cell
GEF-H1 Regulates Rho Activity in HeLa Cell Mitosis
attachment to this structure, causing a blebbing pheno-
type. As GEF-H1 might be important for both linking corti-
cal components (e.g., anillin-bundled actin ﬁlaments of the
contractile ring) to the mitotic spindle as well as regulating
the activity of RhoA effector proteins in the context of con-
tractile ring formation and ingression, our ﬁndings are con-
sistent with GEF-H1 RNAi-induced aberrations of the CF.
Using a FRET-based biosensor, we detected high RhoA
activity at sites of constriction and in the CF during all
stages of cytokinesis (Figure 7E; Figure S10). In contrast,
Yoshizaki et al. (2003) were not able to detect high levels
of RhoA activation in the CF of HeLa cells using their
FRET-based Raichu-RhoA probes. These conﬂicting ob-
servations may be explained by the inherent insensitivity
of Raichu probes to RhoGDI regulation, as well their con-
stitutive localization to membranes ( Nakamura et al.,
2005; Yoshizaki et al., 2003, 2004 ). The localization of
the RhoA biosensor (Pertz et al., 2006) used in this study
coincides with that of endogenous RhoA, perhaps due
to its normal binding to RhoGDI, which controls reversible
RhoA membrane targeting (DerMardirossian and Bokoch,
2005). In fact, RhoGDI activity appears to be important for
RhoA function during cytokinesis, as cells lacking RhoGDI
are multinucleated (Rivero et al., 2002). We conclude that
the patterns of RhoA activity we detect reﬂect the endog-
enous RhoA activation proﬁle and, hence, increase in the
CF during cytokinesis.
GEF-H1 ablation in HeLa cells causes a decrease in
RhoA activation during late stages of cytokinesis, as dem-
onstrated in this paper by FRET and Rho binding domain
(RBD) afﬁnity-based assays (Figures 7 A and 7E). Early
cortical RhoA activation was, however, not perturbed by
reducing GEF-H1 protein levels. Therefore, GEF-H1 may
act as a modulator of late mitosis to ensure that midbody
formation and daughter cell abscission occur correctly.
From this perspective, GEF-H1 might be involved in sus-
taining high RhoA activity in the CF to ensure contractility
and cortical stiffness (O’Connell et al., 1999). By providing
cortical tension in the CF, this would also guarantee that
polarized daughter cell spreading is initiated from the
poles and migration occurs in opposite directions. Loss
of tension in the CF would consequently coincide with
plasma membrane instabilities, especially as new mem-
brane material might still be added to the CF to adjust
the normally high furrow cortical tensions. Reduced
RhoA activation in the CF caused by GEF-H1 depletion
is therefore consistent with the observed membrane per-
turbations during cell cleavage. In contrast to our results,
Bakal et al. (2005) observed that Lfc, the mouse homolog
of GEF-H1, had an early inﬂuence on mitotic spindle as-
sembly in Rat-2 cells. We clearly established here that
early mitotic effects, including mitotic spindle formation,
are not observed upon disruption of GEF-H1 function in
HeLa cells ( Figure S8). We note that Bakal et al. (2005)
did not directly assess the regulation of RhoA activity in
Rat-2 cells by Lfc, precluding comparisons of how RhoA
activation might inﬂuence the phenotypic differences ob-
served. However, such differences in GEF-H1/Lfc function
may be accounted for by a number of variables, including
differences in the adherent properties of the cells used, in
regulatory mechanisms modulating GEF activity, or by in-
trinsic differences in mitotic mechanisms that have been
noted between cells (Burgess and Chang, 2005).
Our data also establish that Ect2 and GEF-H1 mediate
different aspects of RhoA activation at the cell cortex in
HeLa cells. Bulk RhoA activation is not affected by Ect2
depletion, and RhoA activation appears to be mislocal-
ized, rather than diminished (Figure 7E; Figure S10). This
suggests that Ect2 does not directly catalyze GTP loading
on RhoA during cytokinesis. We propose that Ect2 serves
as a core signaling platform essential for the recruitment of
important modules of the cleavage machinery such as
RhoA and its regulators to equatorial sites (seeFigure S9).
Interactions of Ect2 with several components implicated in
the regulation of actomyosin-based contractility of the CF
are known ( Chalamalasetty et al., 2006; Kamijo et al.,
2006; Yuce et al., 2005). Consequently, loss of Ect2 would
cause delocalization of cleavage factors from the equator,
resulting in dispersed RhoA activation around the cortex.
In good agreement, as a result of Ect2 siRNA treatment,
RhoA activation is no longer concentrated at the CF and
becomes scattered around the cell cortex, as indicated
by our FRET experiments. We suggest that once a
RhoA-containing signaling complex is assembled and ac-
tivated at the cell cortex in an MT- and Ect2-dependent
manner, RhoA cycling is intensiﬁed by localized activation
Figure 6D (B). The amount of GTP-RhoA at 45 min after noc release was set to 100%. All values were normalized for the total amount of RhoA. Error
bars indicate ±SEM ([A]; graph). The remaining expression of GEF-H1 and Ect2 in the mitotic lysates were quantitated densitometrically after immu-
noblotting and normalized to CTRL siRNA-treated cells. Values represent the mean of four independent determinations ± SEM. Note that Ect2 ab-
lation was more efﬁcient than depletion of GEF-H1.
(C) HeLa cells stably transfected with a FRET-based RhoA biosensor were analyzed for expression of the latter by live microscopy (upper panel; CFP
channel) and immunoblotting of respective lysates using anti-RhoA antibodies (lower panel). Biosensor expression was/C242-fold increased over en-
dogenous RhoA levels as determined by densitometric analysis.
(D) Localization of the RhoA biosensor in live cells during cytokinesis. The subcellular distribution of the RhoA biosensor in live cells (CFP panel)was
compared to that of endogenous RhoA in TCA-ﬁxed cells during different stages of mitosis. Fixed cells were stained with anti-RhoA (green) and anti-
tubulin (red) antibodies and DAPI (blue) for DNA.
(E) RhoA activation patterns during cytokinesis. HeLa cells stably expressing the RhoA biosensor were transfected with the indicated siRNAs for 30 hr
before progression through cytokinesis was analyzed by DIC microscopy and FRET/CFP ratio imaging to represent FRET efﬁciency (FRET). The lo-
calization of the biosensor is shown in the CFP channel. FRET pictures denote activation patterns of the biosensor. All images are processed and
scaled identically so that regions of intense RhoA activity are shown in red. The elapsed time is denoted at the bottom right corners of each picture.
A representative image of at least six similar images acquired for each condition is shown. White arrows indicate equatorial regions with high RhoA
activation in CTRL-depleted cells and reduced RhoA activation in GEF-H1- and Ect2 siRNA-treated cells during late stages of cytokinesis. The
asterisks indicate regions of aberrant membrane activities in cells treated with GEF-H1 siRNA.
Developmental Cell 12, 699–712, May 2007 ª2007 Elsevier Inc. 709
Developmental Cell
GEF-H1 Regulates Rho Activity in HeLa Cell Mitosis
of GTPase regulators such as GEF-H1. Accordingly, per-
turbation of GEF-H1 was accompanied by late cytokinetic
defects but did not affect localization of RhoA and other
regulators of cytokinesis (Figure S7).
Because CF induction was not affected by GEF-H1 de-
pletion, this also suggests the existence of additional
RhoA activators. Recently, a new exchange factor, Myo-
GEF (Wu et al., 2006), was identiﬁed that associates with
nonmuscle myosin II and whose depletion also causes
multinucleation. For the future, it will be interesting to an-
alyze how different RhoA GEFs are coordinated through
MTs, mitotic kinases, and associated signaling factors to
modulate and ﬁne tune different aspects of mammalian
cell contractile ring formation and constriction.
EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES
Expression Constructs
EGFP-GEF-H1 full-length constructs in the mammalian expression
vector pCMV5 and GST-tagged individual domain constructs of
GEF-H1 in the bacterial expression vector pGEX-KG have been de-
scribed (Krendel et al., 2002; Zenke et al., 2004 ). An EGFP-GEF-H1
C53R/Y393A construct was generated by inserting an N-terminal
KpnI/BstBI fragment including the C53R mutation into a KpnI/BstBI
cut pCMV5-EGFP-GEF-H1 DHmut vector which contained the Y393A
mutation ( Krendel et al., 2002 ). Phosphomimetic (S885D, S959D,
SS885/959DD) and nonphosphorylatable GEF-H1 mutants (S885A,
S959A, SS885/959AA) were generated by site-directed mutagenesis
and conﬁrmed by sequencing.
Antibodies
Generation and afﬁnity puriﬁcation of the polyclonal anti-GEF-H1 anti-
body used in this study has been described (Zenke et al., 2004). The
polyclonal anti-pS885 GEF-H1 antibody was from Cell Signaling Tech-
nology. Both anti-GEF-H1 antibodies were used at 1:1000 in immuno-
blots and 1:100 in IF experiments. Additional antibodies used in this
work are detailed inSupplemental Data.
RNAi Interference
GEF-H1- and Ect2-directed pools of four individual siRNA duplex oli-
gonucleotides (SMARTpool reagent) were purchased from Dharma-
con RNA Technologies and selected according to the SMARTselection
algorithm (seeSupplemental Data ). siRNA pools were transfected
using LipofectAmine 2000 (Invitrogen), as indicated in Supplemental
Data.
Cell Culture, DNA Transfections, Synchronization,
and Drug Treatments
HeLa cells were cultured in Dulbecco’s modiﬁed Eagle’s medium
(DMEM) containing 8% fetal bovine serum, 10 mM glutamine,
10 mM HEPES, and antibiotics (100 U/ml penicillin G and 100mg/ml
streptomycin). For biochemical analysis, cells were grown in 10 cm
dishes and transfected with 5–10mg EGFP-tagged GEF-H1 constructs
using LipofectAmine 2000 per the manufacturer. For immunostaining,
HeLa cells were grown on glass in 24-well plates and transfected with
0.1–0.5 mg plasmid DNA using LipofectAmine Plus reagent (Invitrogen),
per the manufacturer’s recommendations.
Cell synchronization in prometaphase was achieved by the thymi-
dine/nocodazole method and mitotic cells were processed as previ-
ously described, with minor modiﬁcations (Gohla et al., 2005 ); see
Supplemental Data.
Aurora A kinase activity was inhibited with 5 mM ZM477439 (kindly
provided by Astra Zeneca), Aurora B with 0.5 mM Hesperadin (a gift
of Boehringer Ingelheim), Cdk1/Cyclin B with either 10 mM Purvalanol
A (Calbiochem) or 200 nM BMI-1026 (kindly provided by Kyung Lee,
NCI), protein kinase A was blocked with 10 mM H89 (Calbiochem),
and GSK3 with 10 mM SB216763 (Tocris). Solvent (DMSO) controls
were performed in parallel.
Immunoﬂuorescence and Microscopy
For microscopic observations, HeLa cells were grown on glass cover-
slips in 24-well plates in DMEM containing 8% fetal calf serum and
transfected as described above. For localization of endogenous
GEF-H1, cells were ﬁxed in ice-cold MeOH or MeOH/acetone (50:50)
for 20 min. To enhance visualization of GEF-H1 at MTs, soluble cellular
components were extracted for 30 s in extraction buffer (80 mM PIPES
[pH 6.8], 1 mM MgCl2, 4 mM EGTA, 10 mM Taxol, 0.5% [w/v] Triton
X-100) prior to ﬁxation. To stain for endogenous RhoA, cells were ﬁxed
in 10% TCA at 4/C14C( Yonemura et al., 2004). Cells were processed for
immunoﬂuorescence staining according to Gohla et al. (2005) using
Alexa 488 and Alexa 568 secondary antibody conjugates. DNA was
visualized with DAPI (1:2000; Sigma). Quadruple stainings were
obtained using biotinylated phalloidin together with Alexa 750-labeled
streptavidin in accordance with the manufacturer’s suggestions
(Molecular Probes).
Dominant-negative (d/n) GEF-H1 mutants were transfected as
above and ﬁxed in ice-cold MeOH. Only those cells that expressed
the EGFP fusion proteins of interest at comparable levels (similar to
cells expressing EGFP alone) were scored. For this study, multinucle-
ated cells were deﬁned as cells with more than one nucleus, including
lobulated and macro- and micronuclei (Gohla et al., 2005).
Live Cell Imaging
Live cell imaging of dividing cells was performed in a sealed chamber
at 37/C14C on a Nikon TE2000-U microscope with a 403/1.3 oil objective
and differential interference contrast (DIC) optics. Multidimensional
acquisition was controlled by MetaMorph software. For RNAi experi-
ments, cells were transfected with siRNA duplexes for 24 hr and
then synchronized with 100 ng/ml noc for 6–9 hr. After a 45 min release
period in fresh medium, mitotic cells were imaged every 20 s for a
period of 7 hr.
RhoA Activation in Dividing Cells
A HeLa cell line stably expressing a RhoA biosensor (Pertz et al., 2006)
was generated by cotransfecting 4 mg RhoA biosensor plasmid DNA
together with 1mg pPURO vector (Clontech). Stable clonal populations
were isolated based on puromycin resistance and YFP ﬂuorescence,
then further puriﬁed by cell sorting (FACS). FRET imaging was per-
formed as described (Pertz et al., 2006); see also Supplemental Data.
Wild-type HeLa cells or HeLa cells transfected for 24 hr with EGFP-
GEF-H1 constructs or siRNA were synchronized with thymidine/noc or
noc alone, respectively (see text) and released for the indicated times
in fresh medium prior to performing Rhotekin RBD pull-down assays to
quantify GTP-RhoA (Ren and Schwartz, 2000).
Kinase Assays
Active His-tagged Aurora A/B and Cdk1/Cyclin B kinases were pur-
chased from Upstate Cell Signaling Solutions. In vitro phosphorylation
assays were carried out as described (Knaus et al., 1995); see Supple-
mental Data for details.
Phosphatase Treatment, (Co)Immunoprecipitation, and In Vitro
Exchange Assays
Phosphatase treatments, chemical crosslinking with dithiobissuccini-
midylpropionate (DSP), coimmunoprecipitation, and in vitro exchange
assays are detailed inSupplemental Data or described elsewhere
(Krendel et al., 2002; Zenke et al., 2004).
Supplemental Data
Supplemental Data include ten ﬁgures, three movies, and Supplemen-
tal Experimental Procedures and are available athttp://www.
developmentalcell.com/cgi/content/full/12/5/699/DC1/.
710 Developmental Cell 12, 699–712, May 2007 ª2007 Elsevier Inc.
Developmental Cell
GEF-H1 Regulates Rho Activity in HeLa Cell Mitosis
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank B. Anliker and C. Roberson for critical reading and com-
ments on the manuscript. We are grateful to K. Matter (London, UK),
C. Der (University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill), Claire Crafter (Astra
Zeneca), Kyung S. Lee (NCI), and Boehringer Ingelheim for kindly pro-
viding reagents, and to R. Rottapel (Toronto, Canada) for sharing un-
published data. This work was supported by NIH grant GM39434 (to
G.M.B.) and postdoctoral fellowships by the Deutsche Forschungsge-
meinschaft (DFG) (Bi814/1-1) and the American Heart Association
(0425020Y) (to J.B.).
Received: July 18, 2006
Revised: December 21, 2006
Accepted: March 19, 2007
Published: May 7, 2007
REFERENCES
Alsop, G.B., and Zhang, D. (2004). Microtubules continuously dictate
distribution of actin ﬁlaments and positioning of cell cleavage in grass-
hopper spermatocytes. J. Cell Sci.117, 1591–1602.
Andrews, P.D., Knatko, E., Moore, W.J., and Swedlow, J.R. (2003). Mi-
totic mechanics: the auroras come into view. Curr. Opin. Cell Biol.15,
672–683.
Bakal, C.J., Finan, D., LaRose, J., Wells, C.D., Gish, G., Kulkarni, S.,
DeSepulveda, P., Wilde, A., and Rottapel, R. (2005). The Rho GTP ex-
change factor Lfc promotes spindle assembly in early mitosis. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. USA102, 9529–9534.
Bement, W.M., Benink, H.A., and von Dassow, G. (2005). A microtu-
bule-dependent zone of active RhoA during cleavage plane speciﬁca-
tion. J. Cell Biol.170, 91–101.
Burgess, D.R., and Chang, F. (2005). Site selection for the cleavage
furrow at cytokinesis. Trends Cell Biol. 15, 156–162.
Chalamalasetty, R.B., Hummer, S., Nigg, E.A., and Sillje, H.H. (2006).
Inﬂuence of human Ect2 depletion and overexpression on cleavage
furrow formation and abscission. J. Cell Sci.119, 3008–3019.
Clute, P., and Pines, J. (1999). Temporal and spatial control of cyclin
B1 destruction in metaphase. Nat. Cell Biol. 1, 82–87.
D’Avino, P.P., Savoian, M.S., and Glover, D.M. (2004). Mutations in
sticky lead to defective organization of the contractile ring during cyto-
kinesis and are enhanced by Rho and suppressed by Rac. J. Cell Biol.
166, 61–71.
D’Avino, P.P., Savoian, M.S., and Glover, D.M. (2005). Cleavage furrow
formation and ingression during animal cytokinesis: a microtubule leg-
acy. J. Cell Sci.118, 1549–1558.
DerMardirossian, C., and Bokoch, G.M. (2005). GDIs: central regula-
tory molecules in Rho GTPase activation. Trends Cell Biol. 15, 356–
363.
Drechsel, D.N., Hyman, A.A., Hall, A., and Glotzer, M. (1997). A require-
ment for Rho and Cdc42 during cytokinesis inXenopus embryos. Curr.
Biol. 7, 12–23.
Echard, A., Hickson, G.R., Foley, E., and O’Farrell, P.H. (2004). Termi-
nal cytokinesis events uncovered after an RNAi screen. Curr. Biol.14,
1685–1693.
Ferrari, S. (2006). Protein kinases controlling the onset of mitosis. Cell.
Mol. Life Sci. 63, 781–795.
Glotzer, M. (2004). Cleavage furrow positioning. J. Cell Biol.164, 347–
351.
Gohla, A., Birkenfeld, J., and Bokoch, G.M. (2005). Chronophin, a novel
HAD-type serine protein phosphatase, regulates coﬁlin-dependent ac-
tin dynamics. Nat. Cell Biol.7, 21–29.
Hara, T., Abe, M., Inoue, H., Yu, L.R., Veenstra, T.D., Kang, Y.H., Lee,
K.S., and Miki, T. (2006). Cytokinesis regulator ECT2 changes its con-
formation through phosphorylation at Thr-341 in G2/M phase. Onco-
gene 25, 566–578.
Kamijo, K., Ohara, N., Abe, M., Uchimura, T., Hosoya, H., Lee, J.S.,
and Miki, T. (2006). Dissecting the role of Rho-mediated signaling in
contractile ring formation. Mol. Biol. Cell17, 43–55.
Kim, J.E., Billadeau, D.D., and Chen, J. (2005). The tandem BRCT do-
mains of Ect2 are required for both negative and positive regulation of
Ect2 in cytokinesis. J. Biol. Chem. 280, 5733–5739.
Kimura, K., Tsuji, T., Takada, Y., Miki, T., and Narumiya, S. (2000). Ac-
cumulation of GTP-bound RhoA during cytokinesis and a critical role of
ECT2 in this accumulation. J. Biol. Chem.275, 17233–17236.
Kishi, K., Sasaki, T., Kuroda, S., Itoh, T., and Takai, Y. (1993). Regula-
tion of cytoplasmic division of Xenopus embryo by rho p21 and its in-
hibitory GDP/GTP exchange protein (rho GDI). J. Cell Biol.120, 1187–
1195.
Knaus, U.G., Morris, S., Dong, H.J., Chernoff, J., and Bokoch, G.M.
(1995). Regulation of human leukocyte p21-activated kinases through
G protein-coupled receptors. Science 269, 221–223.
Krendel, M., Zenke, F.T., and Bokoch, G.M. (2002). Nucleotide ex-
change factor GEF-H1 mediates cross-talk between microtubules
and the actin cytoskeleton. Nat. Cell Biol. 4, 294–301.
Mandato, C.A., Benink, H.A., and Bement, W.M. (2000). Microtubule-
actomyosin interactions in cortical ﬂow and cytokinesis. Cell Motil. Cy-
toskeleton45, 87–92.
Minoshima, Y., Kawashima, T., Hirose, K., Tonozuka, Y., Kawajiri, A.,
Bao, Y.C., Deng, X., Tatsuka, M., Narumiya, S., May, W.S., Jr., et al.
(2003). Phosphorylation by aurora B converts MgcRacGAP to a Rho-
GAP during cytokinesis. Dev. Cell4, 549–560.
Nakamura, T., Aoki, K., and Matsuda, M. (2005). Monitoring spatio-
temporal regulation of Ras and Rho GTPase with GFP-based FRET
probes. Methods37, 146–153.
Nigg, E.A. (1995). Cyclin-dependent protein kinases: key regulators of
the eukaryotic cell cycle. Bioessays 17, 471–480.
Nigg, E.A. (2001). Mitotic kinases as regulators of cell division and its
checkpoints. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 2, 21–32.
Niiya, F., Tatsumoto, T., Lee, K.S., and Miki, T. (2006). Phosphorylation
of the cytokinesis regulator ECT2 at G2/M phase stimulates associa-
tion of the mitotic kinase Plk1 and accumulation of GTP-bound
RhoA. Oncogene25, 827–837.
Nishimura, Y., and Yonemura, S. (2006). Centralspindlin regulates
ECT2 and RhoA accumulation at the equatorial cortex during cytokine-
sis. J. Cell Sci.119, 104–114.
O’Connell, C.B., Wheatley, S.P., Ahmed, S., and Wang, Y.L. (1999).
The small GTP-binding protein rho regulates cortical activities in cul-
tured cells during division. J. Cell Biol. 144, 305–313.
Pertz, O., Hodgson, L., Klemke, R.L., and Hahn, K.M. (2006). Spatio-
temporal dynamics of RhoA activity in migrating cells. Nature 440,
1069–1072.
Piekny, A., Werner, M., and Glotzer, M. (2005). Cytokinesis: welcome
to the Rho zone. Trends Cell Biol. 15, 651–658.
Rappaport, R. (1997). Cleavage furrow establishment by the moving
mitotic apparatus. Dev. Growth Differ. 39, 221–226.
Ren, X.D., and Schwartz, M.A. (2000). Determination of GTP loading on
Rho. Methods Enzymol. 325, 264–272.
Ren, Y., Li, R., Zheng, Y., and Busch, H. (1998). Cloning and character-
ization of GEF-H1, a microtubule-associated guanine nucleotide ex-
change factor for Rac and Rho GTPases. J. Biol. Chem.273, 34954–
34960.
Rivero, F., Illenberger, D., Somesh, B.P., Dislich, H., Adam, N., and
Meyer, A.K. (2002). Defects in cytokinesis, actin reorganization and
the contractile vacuole in cells deﬁcient in RhoGDI. EMBO J.21,
4539–4549.
Developmental Cell 12, 699–712, May 2007 ª2007 Elsevier Inc. 711
Developmental Cell
GEF-H1 Regulates Rho Activity in HeLa Cell Mitosis
Saito, S., Liu, X.F., Kamijo, K., Raziuddin, R., Tatsumoto, T., Okamoto,
I., Chen, X., Lee, C.C., Lorenzi, M.V., Ohara, N., and Miki, T. (2004). De-
regulation and mislocalization of the cytokinesis regulator ECT2 acti-
vate the Rho signaling pathways leading to malignant transformation.
J. Biol. Chem.279, 7169–7179.
Somers, W.G., and Saint, R. (2003). A RhoGEF and Rho family
GTPase-activating protein complex links the contractile ring to cortical
microtubules at the onset of cytokinesis. Dev. Cell4, 29–39.
Tatsumoto, T., Xie, X., Blumenthal, R., Okamoto, I., and Miki, T. (1999).
Human ECT2 is an exchange factor for Rho GTPases, phosphorylated
in G2/M phases, and involved in cytokinesis. J. Cell Biol.147, 921–928.
Wu, D., Asiedu, M., Adelstein, R.S., and Wei, Q. (2006). A novel gua-
nine nucleotide exchange factor MyoGEF is required for cytokinesis.
Cell Cycle5, 1234–1239.
Yonemura, S., Hirao-Minakuchi, K., and Nishimura, Y. (2004). Rho lo-
calization in cells and tissues. Exp. Cell Res. 295, 300–314.
Yoshizaki, H., Ohba, Y., Kurokawa, K., Itoh, R.E., Nakamura, T.,
Mochizuki, N., Nagashima, K., and Matsuda, M. (2003). Activity of
Rho-family GTPases during cell division as visualized with FRET-
based probes. J. Cell Biol. 162, 223–232.
Yoshizaki, H., Ohba, Y., Parrini, M.C., Dulyaninova, N.G., Bresnick,
A.R., Mochizuki, N., and Matsuda, M. (2004). Cell type-speciﬁc regula-
tion of RhoA activity during cytokinesis. J. Biol. Chem. 279, 44756–
44762.
Yuce, O., Piekny, A., and Glotzer, M. (2005). An ECT2-centralspindlin
complex regulates the localization and function of RhoA. J. Cell Biol.
170, 571–582.
Zenke, F.T., Krendel, M., DerMardirossian, C., King, C.C., Bohl, B.P.,
and Bokoch, G.M. (2004). p21-activated kinase 1 phosphorylates
and regulates 14-3-3 binding to GEF-H1, a microtubule-localized
Rho exchange factor. J. Biol. Chem.279, 18392–18400.
Zhai, Y., Kronebusch, P.J., Simon, P.M., and Borisy, G.G. (1996). Mi-
crotubule dynamics at the G2/M transition: abrupt breakdown of cyto-
plasmic microtubules at nuclear envelope breakdown and implications
for spindle morphogenesis. J. Cell Biol.135, 201–214.
712 Developmental Cell 12, 699–712, May 2007 ª2007 Elsevier Inc.
Developmental Cell
GEF-H1 Regulates Rho Activity in HeLa Cell Mitosis
Update
Developmental Cell
Volume 12, Issue 6, 5 June 2007, Page 1007
 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.devcel.2007.05.013DOI:
Developmental Cell
Erratum
GEF-H1 Modulates Localized RhoA Activation during
Cytokinesis under the Control of Mitotic Kinases
Jo¨ rg Birkenfeld, Perihan Nalbant, Benjamin P. Bohl, Olivier Pertz, Klaus M. Hahn, and Gary M. Bokoch*
*Correspondence: bokoch@scripps.edu
DOI 10.1016/j.devcel.2007.05.013
(Developmental Cell12, 699–712; May 8, 2007)
The following sentences were omitted from the acknowledgments: Dr. Birkenfeld performed a portion of this study at the
Institut fu¨ r Biochemie und Molekularbiologie II, Klinkum der Heinrich-Heine-Universita¨ t, Dusseldorf, Germany. In addition to
the grant support already cited, this project was supported by Cell Migration Consortium Grant No U54 GM064346 from
NIGMS to KMH. This was manuscript #18108-IMM from The Scripps Research Institute.
Developmental Cell12, 1007, June 2007ª2007 Elsevier Inc. 1007