JCB: Article
JCB
JCB: Tools
91
The Rockefeller University Press  $30.00
J. Cell Biol. Vol. 212 No. 1 91–111
www.jcb.org/cgi/doi/10.1083/jcb.201506018
Introduction
Neurite outgrowth is a prerequisite step to produce the axons 
and dendrites that wire the adult brain. Neuronal cell migra -
tion is crucial for brain morphogenesis. In cell culture, neurite 
outgrowth is highly dynamic and involves a series of dynamic 
morphogenetic processes (MPs) such as neurite initiation, 
elongation, branching, growth cone motility, and collapse (da 
Silva and Dotti, 2002). Cultured neuronal cells are also highly 
motile, which might reflect the process of neuronal migration 
(Nadarajah and Parnavelas, 2002). Specific spatiotemporal 
signaling networks control the cytoskeletal, trafficking, and 
adhesion dynamics required for each MP to occur. Because 
neurite outgrowth and cell migration use overlapping cellular 
machineries, it is conceivable that some molecular components 
might regulate both processes. These MPs fluctuate on length 
and time scales of tens of microns and minutes to hours, which 
have been missed in steady-state neurite outgrowth measure -
ments, most often at a late differentiation stage. Identification 
of MP-specific signaling networks thus requires the quantifica -
tion their morphodynamics.
Rho GTPases are key regulators of the cytoskeletal dy -
namics that regulate neuronal cell morphogenesis (da Silva and 
Dotti, 2002). Their activity is tightly controlled in time and 
space by guanine nucleotide-exchange factors (GEFs; Rossman 
et al., 2005) and GTPase-activating proteins (GAPs; Moon and 
Zheng, 2003) that activate and deactivate GTPases, respectively. 
This regulation, as well as coupling of Rho GTPases to specific 
downstream effectors, dictates their cytoskeletal output at any 
given subcellular localization (Pertz, 2010). Current models 
Rho guanosine triphosphatases (GTPases) control the cytoskeletal dynamics that power neurite outgrowth. This process 
consists of dynamic neurite initiation, elongation, retraction, and branching cycles that are likely to be regulated by 
specific spatiotemporal signaling networks, which cannot be resolved with static, steady-state assays. We present Neu-
riteTracker, a computer-vision approach to automatically segment and track neuronal morphodynamics in time-lapse 
datasets. Feature extraction then quantifies dynamic neurite outgrowth phenotypes. We identify a set of stereotypic 
neurite outgrowth morphodynamic behaviors in a cultured neuronal cell system. Systematic RNA interference perturba-
tion of a Rho GTPase interactome consisting of 219 proteins reveals a limited set of morphodynamic phenotypes. As 
proof of concept, we show that loss of function of two distinct RhoA-specific GTPase-activating proteins (GAPs) leads to 
opposite neurite outgrowth phenotypes. Imaging of RhoA activation dynamics indicates that both GAPs regulate differ-
ent spatiotemporal Rho GTPase pools, with distinct functions. Our results provide a starting point to dissect spatiotempo-
ral Rho GTPase signaling networks that regulate neurite outgrowth.
Computer vision profiling of neurite outgrowth 
dynamics reveals spatiotemporal modularity of Rho 
GTPase signaling
Ludovico Fusco,1* Riwal Lefort,2* Kevin Smith,3* Fethallah Benmansour,3 German Gonzalez,3 Caterina Barillari,4 
Bernd Rinn,4 Francois Fleuret,2 Pascal Fua,3 and Olivier Pertz1
1Department of Biomedicine, University of Basel, 4058 Basel, Switzerland
2Institut Dalla Molle d'Intelligence Artificielle Perceptive (IDI AP Research Institute), 1920 Martigny, Switzerland
3Computer Vision Laboratory, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, 1015 Lausanne, Switzerland
4Department of Biosystems Science and Engineering, Eidgenössische Technische Hochschule, 4058 Basel, Switzerland
© 2016 Fusco et al. This article is distributed under the terms of an Attribution–Noncommercial–
Share Alike–No Mirror Sites license for the first six months after the publication date (see 
http ://www .rupress .org /terms). After six months it is available under a Creative Commons 
License (Attribution–Noncommercial–Share Alike 3.0 Unported license, as described at  
http ://creativecommons .org /licenses /by -nc -sa /3 .0 /).
*L. Fusco, R. Lefort, and K. Smith contributed equally to this paper.
Correspondence to Olivier Pertz: olivier.pertz@izb.unibe.ch
R. Lefort’s present address is Lab-STI  CC (UMR CNRS 6285), ENS  TA Bretagne 
(Universite Europeenne de Bretagne), 29806 Brest Cedex 9, France.
K.  Smith’s present address is SciLifeLab/KTH Royal Institute of Technology 
School of Computer Science and Communication, 114 28 Stockholm, Sweden.
F.  Benmansour’s present address is F.  Hoffmann-La Roche AG, 4070 Basel, 
Switzerland.
G. Gonzalez’s present address is Dept. of Radiology, Brigham and Women’s 
Hospital, Boston, MA 02115.
O. Pertz’s present address is Institute of Cell Biology, University of Bern, 3012 
Bern, Switzerland.
Abbreviations used in this paper: CV, computer vision; FRET, Förster resonance 
energy transfer; GAP, GTPase-activating protein; GEF, guanine nucleotide-ex -
change factor; HDS, hierarchical data structure; HS, high stringency; KD, knock-
down; LS, low stringency; MDS, morphodynamic signature; MLCK, myosin light 
chain kinase; MP, morphogenetic process; MRCK, myotonin-related dystrophyn 
kinase myosin light chain kinase; pMLC, myosin light chain phosphorylation.
THE JOURNAL OF CELL BIOLOGY
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jcb/article-pdf/212/1/91/1594050/jcb_201506018.pdf by Universitat Bern user on 06 March 2025

JCB • Volume 212 • NumBer 1 • 201692
state that Rac1 and Cdc42 regulate neurite outgrowth, whereas 
RhoA controls neurite collapse (da Silva and Dotti, 2002). 
However, multiple GEFs, GAPs, and effectors are ubiquitously 
expressed by cells and outnumber their cognate Rho GTPases 
(Moon and Zheng, 2003; Rossman et al., 2005). This raises the 
question of the significance of this signaling complexity.
We present NeuriteTracker, a computer vision (CV) plat-
form to track neuronal morphodynamics from high-content 
time-lapse imaging datasets. Automatic extraction of a large set 
of morphological and morphodynamic features, coupled with 
adequate statistical analysis, can then quantify the dynamics of 
neuronal morphogenesis. Our pipeline identifies distinct, ste-
reotyped morphodynamic phases during neuronal cell morpho-
genesis and quantifies a set of morphodynamic phenotypes in a 
siRNA screen targeting a candidate Rho GTPase interactome. 
This provides insight into the spatiotemporal Rho GTPase sig-
naling networks regulating distinct MPs. As proof of concept for 
our screen, we show that two RhoA-specific GAPs regulate two 
distinct spatiotemporal RhoA signaling networks controlling 
different cytoskeletal outputs. Our data provide an initial re-
source to study the complex spatiotemporal Rho GTPase sig-
naling networks that regulate neuronal cell morphogenesis.
Results
High-content live-cell imaging pipeline
To study neuronal dynamics, we used neuronal-like mouse 
N1E-115 neuroblastoma cells. To visualize cell morphology, 
we used a bicistronic vector that expresses Lifeact-GFP, a fu-
sion of GFP with the F-actin binding peptide Lifeact (Riedl 
et al., 2008), and a nuclear localization NLS-mCherry fusion, 
which labels the nucleus for cell detection (Fig. 1 a). This con-
struct can be expressed at a high level without affecting neurite 
outgrowth (Fig. S1, a and b) and provides homogeneous high 
contrast on neurites and somata for imaging with air objectives 
(Fig. 1 b and Video 1). An additional benefit of our reporter is 
that it labels F-actin–containing branches not apparent using the 
classic microtubule staining used in neurite outgrowth assays. 
To perturb different signaling molecules, we cotransfected our 
reporter plasmid with siRNAs in nondifferentiated cells. These 
cells were subsequently differentiated by serum starvation, re-
plated on laminin-coated coverslips, and allowed to extend neu-
rites for 19.6 h (Fig. S1 c). As proof of concept, we evaluated 
knockdown (KD) of previously characterized proteins. MKK7 
KD leads to highly unstable, short neurites owing to loss of 
microtubule bundling in the neurite shaft (Feltrin et al., 2012). 
RhoA KD leads to increased neurite outgrowth (Hirose et al., 
1998) through loss of growth cone collapse controlled by RhoA 
(Fritz et al., 2013). SrGAP2 KD leads to stabilization of the 
growth cone and soma lamellipodial veils, increasing neurite 
outgrowth and branching, as well as cell spreading and migra-
tion (Pertz et al., 2008). Our protocol enabled efficient KD of 
these proteins, which recapitulated the expected phenotypes 
(Fig. S1, d–f). We also identified a nontargeting siRNA that did 
not affect neurite outgrowth (Fig. S1 g). To perform high-con-
tent live-cell imaging, we optimized our microscope setup for 
fast, two-color imaging of multiple wells. Time-lapse analysis 
started 3  h postplating, a time point at which initial neurites 
already protruded, rendering cells resistant to phototoxicity. An 
automated image analysis routine was then used to identify 10 
fields of view per well containing an adequate number of cells 
exhibiting a specific range in fluorescence intensities and cell 
areas (Fig. S1, h–j). We then time-lapsed neurite outgrowth dy-
namics in 10 fields of view per well across a 24-well plate with 
12-min time resolution for a total of 19.6 h.
NeuriteTracker pipeline to quantify 
neuronal dynamics
To analyze the time-lapse datasets, we engineered Neur -
iteTracker, an automated CV pipeline to segment and track 
soma and neurite morphodynamics described in Materials and 
methods (Fig. 1, b and c; and Video 2). First, mCherry-NLS– 
labeled nuclei and their associated somata were identified 
using maximally stable extremal regions and a fast marching 
region growing step (Fig. 1 c, steps 1 and 2). Second, a graph- 
association tracking method was applied over the time-lapse 
data to provide a unique label for each tracked cell over time 
(Fig. 1 c, steps 3 and 4). Neurites were extracted for each cell 
by applying a calibrated Hessian-based filter, computing a geo-
desic distance combining intensity and geometric distance, 
and applying a threshold (Fig. 1 c, steps 5–7). Candidate ter -
minals were identified, and neurite filaments were detected by 
backtracing and reconstruction with a minimal spanning tree 
(Fig. 1 c, step 8). Again applying the graph association to the 
neurites yielded automatic segmentation and tracking of indi-
vidual cell nuclei, soma, and neurites (Fig. 2 a and Video 2). 
Our pipeline provided robust results across a wide variety of 
fluorescence intensities that result from transient transfection 
and was evaluated against human annotated ground-truth data-
sets (Fig. S2 and Videos 3 and 4).
To describe the segmented cells, we defined a series of pa-
rameters that describe nucleus, soma, and neurite morphology, 
the neurite being modeled as a tree arborescence (Figs. 2 b and 
S3; also see Materials and methods, Definition of nuclei and 
soma parameters and Definition of neurite parameters). These 
data were then organized in a hierarchical data structure (HDS) 
that models the neurite, as well as the nucleus and soma geom-
etries, at a given time point (Fig. 2 c). A graph representation 
of this HDS can then be rendered (Fig. 1 c, step 9). Finally, we 
used these parameters and the HDS to extract an as-compre-
hensive-as-possible set of features that describe nuclei, soma, 
and neurite morphology and morphodynamics. For each cell, 
28 “static” features that provide measurements relevant to cell 
morphology at one specific time point were extracted from the 
HDS and stored in a feature vector as described in Materials and 
methods (Definition of static features). The dynamic evolution 
of some of these features is shown in Fig. 2 d. Furthermore, we 
computed five layers of dynamic features, which provide sum-
maries of the temporal evolution of static features on a per-cell 
basis (described in Materials and methods, Definition of dy-
namic features). These include the mean value of static features 
through time (1), the time a feature expands/contracts (2/3), the 
number of inflection points during feature evolution (4), and 
the frequency of the expansion of a feature (5). This provides a 
comprehensive description of neurite and soma morphodynam-
ics. Importantly, these different layers of dynamic features are 
to some extent redundant, and a selection of a specific set of fea-
tures can be required to avoid redundancy during their analysis.
We also used our CV pipeline to track and segment 
neuronal morphodynamics of Lifeact-GFP/NLS-mCherry– 
transfected Pheochromocytoma PC-12 cells plated on collagen 
and stimulated with nerve growth factor. The raw images, their 
superimposed HDS graph representations, and the temporal  
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jcb/article-pdf/212/1/91/1594050/jcb_201506018.pdf by Universitat Bern user on 06 March 2025

rho GTPase signaling complexity in neurite outgrowth • Fusco et al. 93
evolution of some extracted features are shown in Fig. S4 (a–c) 
and indicate that our CV pipeline is sufficiently versatile to be 
applied to different neuronal-like cell types.
We provide access to the MAT LAB code of 
NeuriteTracker through the Github platform at https ://github 
.com /sgbasel /neuritetracker. Analysis of different neuronal 
morphologies requires the tuning of a small set of parameters, 
which can be conveniently performed using a graphical 
user interface. Ultimately, NeuriteTracker provides both the 
extracted features in the HDS format in a CSV file, as well as a 
graph representation of the HDS. A test time-lapse dataset and 
manual are also provided.
Functional analysis of a Rho GTPase 
signaling network
As a proof of concept to validate NeuriteTracker, we performed 
an siRNA screen targeting a potential Rho GTPase interac-
tome. We used a bioinformatics approach to mine a proteom-
ics dataset of purified neurite and soma fractions of N1E-115 
cells (Pertz et al., 2008) to identify GEFs, GAPs, effectors, and 
their interacting proteins that potentially interact with a panel 
of Rho GTPases (Fig.  3  a; described in Materials and meth-
ods). This revealed a complex interactome consisting of 219, 
mostly neurite-enriched, proteins. Gene ontology analysis re-
vealed a large coverage of cellular processes relevant to adhe-
sion and cytoskeletal dynamics and axonal guidance (Fig. 3 b). 
We used three distinct siRNAs per gene, leading to a total of 
657 perturbations (siRNA sequences are described in Table 
S1). These were distributed among 32 experiments, with each 
24-well plate containing one negative, nontargeting and one 
positive, MKK7-targeting siRNA control. For each of these 
721 wells (657 perturbations + 64 controls), we acquired 10 
fields of view, therefore accounting for a total of 7,210 time-
lapse movies. We then developed a statistical analysis pipeline 
to analyze this dataset.
Morphodynamic signature extraction
To quantify the effect of perturbations on neuronal dynamics, 
we considered 28 static features measured on the whole-cell 
population at all the different time points of a time-lapse data-
set. This provides the distribution of feature values throughout 
the whole lifetime of the cell population (Fig.  4  a, popula-
tion-level features). We also considered the “frequency expan-
sion” feature set that consists of 18 features that summarize the 
dynamics of single cells throughout the movie (Fig.  4  a, dy-
namic cell-level features).
Figure 1. Tracking and segmentation of neuronal morphodynamics. (a) Schematics of Lifeact-GFP/NLS-mCherry expression vector. (b) Raw NLS-mCherry 
channel (left), raw Lifeact-GFP channel (middle), and Lifeact-GFP channel (right) with superimposed nucleus, soma, and neurite segmentations color-coded 
according to cell identity. Bar, 100 µm. Fluorescent images are shown in inverted black-and-white contrast. (c) Different segmentation steps highlighted in 
magnification from inset 1 from panel b.
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jcb/article-pdf/212/1/91/1594050/jcb_201506018.pdf by Universitat Bern user on 06 March 2025

JCB • Volume 212 • NumBer 1 • 201694
For each feature, we used a z-test to compare feature value 
distributions of control and siRNA-transfected cells (Fig. 4 b). 
The z-score polarity indicates if a specific feature value aug-
ments or decreases when control and KD cells are compared. All 
the details relevant to our data analysis pipeline are explained 
in Materials and methods. To mitigate any potential off-target 
effects, we computed mean z-scores from the three siRNAs, 
according to the rule that if at least two of three siRNAs pro-
duce the same phenotype for a given feature (Echeverri et al., 
2006), then this phenotype is on target (Fig. 4 c). This approach 
provides a mean z-score vector that indicates penetrance and 
polarity for each feature in response to a siRNA perturbation 
(Lefort et al., 2015). We refer to this z-score vector as the mor-
phodynamic signature (MDS) of the target gene.
We then reduced the feature space by two successive steps. 
First, we evaluated the feature robustness at different stringency 
levels by comparing the MDS of the MKK7-KD positive control 
phenotype across the 32 independent performed experiments. 
Specifically, we selected features that exhibited a statistically 
relevant z-score with identical polarity in at least 65% (low 
stringency [LS]) or 90% (high stringency [HS]) of the 32 MKK7 
KD control experiments. Second, we selected features that have 
high information content; we retained features that exhibit a 
statistically significant z-score in at least 40% of the 219 genes 
across the siRNA screen. This especially affected “dynamic” 
features, because those require integration of a large number of 
measurements over time, leading to a lower measurement sam-
ple size than static features. This reduced the feature space to 
32%/78% (LS feature set) and 75%/95% (HS feature set) static/
dynamic features, providing robust feature sets that are highly 
informative about neuronal morphology and dynamics.
We evaluated the validity of our pipeline by extracting 
MDSs associated with our previously characterized SrGAP2, 
MKK7, and RhoA KD phenotypes (Figs. 4 d and S1 e). This 
revealed that our approach successfully captures morphologi-
cal and morphodynamic phenotypes (Fig. 4, e and f). SrGAP2 
KD led to increased neurite number, length, and branching, as 
well as increased soma migration, which further correlate with 
increased cell and nucleus eccentricity. As expected, MKK7 
KD led to reduced frequency of neurite extension events, short 
neurites, and low soma motility. RhoA KD led to reduced 
collapse frequency, producing longer neurites, with reduced 
branching. Some of these features can be easily assessed by 
visual inspection of static images (neurite length/branching) 
Figure 2. Feature extraction from time-lapse datasets. (a) Example of segmentation of two cells from a time-lapse dataset (from insets 2 and 3 in Fig. 1 b). 
Nucleus, soma, and neurite segmentations are color-coded for cell identity. Time, h:min. Bar, 50 µm. (b) Schematics describing neuronal cell morphology, 
and how different neuronal parameters are extracted for definition of neuronal arborescence. (c) Example of the HDS that models the schematic cell in 
b. (d) Temporal evolution of a set of features for the two cells shown in panel a.
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jcb/article-pdf/212/1/91/1594050/jcb_201506018.pdf by Universitat Bern user on 06 March 2025

rho GTPase signaling complexity in neurite outgrowth • Fusco et al. 95
Figure 3. Identification of a candidate Rho GTPase signaling network. (a) Rho GTPase protein interaction network as determined by the strategy de-
scribed in Materials and methods. Different families of proteins known to interact with six expressed Rho GTPases are shown. Proteins are named by 
their official gene symbol according to Entrez Gene. Relative neurite protein enrichment is color-coded according to the color scale bar at the bottom of 
the figure. Plain lines represent direct protein–protein interaction. Icons are color-coded according to the color scale bar. (b) Gene Ontology analysis of 
the most significant canonical pathways present in the protein network shown in panel a. Dotted line represents significance threshold as measured by 
Fisher’s exact test (P < 0.05).
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jcb/article-pdf/212/1/91/1594050/jcb_201506018.pdf by Universitat Bern user on 06 March 2025

JCB • Volume 212 • NumBer 1 • 201696
or time-lapse datasets (soma speed). Others, such as soma cir -
cularity, are more subtle and can be detected only by our CV 
approach. Plotting feature distribution in the different perturbed 
states indicates the cellular heterogeneity associated with our 
cell system (Fig. 4 g).
siRNA screen analysis
A set of quality-control metrics showed that a similar number 
of cells per field of view and NLS-mCherry fluorescence in-
tensities occurred in the different experimental plates (Fig. 5, a 
and b). Quantification of off-target effects across the features, 
throughout the screen, revealed that 43% of the measurements 
led to identical z-score polarities for all three siRNAs; 52% 
of the measurements had two of three siRNAs yielding iden-
tical z-score polarities, whereas in only 5% of the cases, one 
siRNA led to a statistically nonsignificant z-score and the two 
other yielded two distinct polarities. Further, this low level of 
off-target effect was not biased to a specific set of experimental 
plates (Fig. 5 c). Finally, the positive MKK7-KD control asso-
ciated with each plate yielded a stable MDS across the differ -
ent experimental plates (Fig. 5 d), indicating the stability of our 
pipeline. Each siRNA perturbation led to a quantifiable MDS 
with a mean z-score of 1.2 ± 1.9 for the least penetrant and 
40.9 ± 21.6 for the most penetrant phenotype. Even in the least 
penetrant phenotypes, a subset of features displayed statisti-
cally relevant z-scores.
To identify sets of gene perturbations that lead to common 
MDSs, we binarized z-score vectors to give equal weight to all 
features and performed bottom-up, hierarchical clustering. Sim-
ilar clustering results were observed whether z-score matrices 
were binarized or not (e.g., the z-score value was taken into 
account). Iterative evaluation of different dendrogram thresh-
olds was performed by visual inspection of the quality of the 
clusters (Fig.  5, e–h), using HDS representations to evaluate 
Figure 4. Morphodynamic signature extraction. (a) Schematics of two distinct feature analysis levels. Static population-level and dynamic cell-level features 
are considered. (b) Feature extraction procedure. z-score vector defines statistical significance, penetrance, and polarity of measured feature distributions 
of control compared with siRNA-treated cells. (c) Deconvolution of RNAi OFF-target effects. For each given feature: (1) if the three siRNA perturbations 
lead to a z-score with identical polarity, the mean z-score is computed; (2) if two of three siRNA perturbations lead to a z-score with identical polarity, the 
mean z-score for the two features with the same polarity is computed; (3) if the three siRNA perturbations yield three different z-score polarities, then the 
z feature score is set to 0. (d) Raw image (left, inverted black-and-white contrast), HDS graph representation (middle), and cell migration tracks (right) for 
SrGAP2, MKK7, and RhoA siRNA perturbations are shown. Bar, 50 µm. (e and f) Gene-associated MDSs represented by a color map. (e) LS feature set; 
(f) HS feature set. z-score scale is also shown. (g) Normalized histograms of representative feature distribution profiles. The data were normalized dividing 
each histogram value by the histogram area. Vertical bars represent the mean. The z-score associated with each feature is also shown.
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jcb/article-pdf/212/1/91/1594050/jcb_201506018.pdf by Universitat Bern user on 06 March 2025

rho GTPase signaling complexity in neurite outgrowth • Fusco et al. 97
Figure 5. siRNA screen quality controls and MDS hierarchical clustering. (a) Boxplots quantification of number of cells per field of view across 32 independent 
experiments. Median (red line), interquartile range (box), and domain (dashed line) are represented. The outliers are plotted individually. (b) Boxplot quantification 
of NLS-mCherry mean fluorescence intensity across 32 independent experiments. Median (red line), interquartile range (box), and domain (dashed line) are repre-
sented. The outliers are plotted individually. (c) Per-plate off-target effect analysis across 32 independent experiments. The analysis takes in consideration the off-target 
effect of the LS feature set. Black lines indicate the three siRNAs generate different phenotypes. Blue line indicates that two siRNAs generate the same phenotype, but 
the phenotype of the third siRNA is different. Red lines indicate that the three siRNAs generate the same phenotype. For each plate, the proportion of each case is 
represented by continuous lines. The dashed line represents the mean value of the case across the whole screen. (d) MDS of MKK7-KD cells across 32 independent 
experiments. z-score vector maps are shown for each experimental plate. Right bar indicates z-score color code. (e and f) L0 distances comparing all the MDS to 
each other for low- (e) and high-stringency (f) feature sets. L0 distances were normalized to range between 0 and 100 (percentage). L0 distances are color-coded 
so that warm colors indicate low distances and cold colors indicate high distances. (g) MDSs hierarchical clustering using the LS feature set. MDS z-scores are col-
or-coded according to the color scale. Identified clusters for different dendrogram thresholds are shown by black lines. The number of clusters, genes clustered, and 
nonclustered genes are also indicated. (h) MDSs hierarchical clustering using the HS feature set with a dendrogram threshold of 70%.
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jcb/article-pdf/212/1/91/1594050/jcb_201506018.pdf by Universitat Bern user on 06 March 2025

JCB • Volume 212 • NumBer 1 • 201698
the similarity of penetrant phenotypes for different gene per -
turbations within a cluster. The rationale to identify cells with 
penetrant phenotypes is mentioned in the next paragraph. For 
the LS feature set, a good compromise was obtained with a 
60% dendrogram threshold, meaning that 60% of the features 
of the MDSs within a cluster have the same polarity. This led 
to the identification of 19 phenoclusters that comprise 194 of 
219 genes (Fig. 5, e and g). Using the HS feature set led to the 
identification of 15 clusters that comprise 207 of the 219 genes 
with a 70% dendrogram threshold (Fig. 5, f and h). Any of the 
nonclustered genes also led to phenotypes, but these have to be 
inspected on a case-by-case basis.
For intuitive display, we manually sorted phenoclusters 
according to the overall polarity of their MDSs (Figs. 6 and S4 
d). We then described the phenoclusters at different complexity 
levels and focused first on static, then on dynamic phenotypes. 
Phenotypes that can be explained by static features led us to 
group the different clusters in five large phenotypic categories: 
short neurites (group 1: C1–C7), spread soma multiple and/or 
branched short neurites (group 2: C8), normal neurites with 
soma phenotypes (group 3: C9–C10), long/unbranched neurites 
(group 4: C11–C13), and long/branched neurites (group 5: C14–
C19). To provide a visual representation of these phenotypic 
categories at the static level, we used a mathematical model 
that selects specific cells with a highly penetrant phenotype 
according to three visually intuitive features (number of 
neurites, number of branches, and maximum extreme length per 
neurite mean). These are then represented using HDS-modeled 
graph representations, providing a representative example of 
the phenotype (Fig.  6, Fig. S4 d, and Video  5). Within these 
static-level phenotype groups, the different subclusters are 
characterized by additional static features that are mostly 
relevant to nucleus and soma morphology and that are less 
visually evident. Dynamic features such as cell migration 
(speed) and features relevant to neurite outgrowth dynamics 
(total neurite length frequency expansion, etc.) then discriminate 
further clusters. Representative dynamic phenotypes were 
selected using our mathematical model using the same three 
features set but additionally including the total neurite length 
frequency expansion feature (Videos 6 and 7). Phenoclusters 
computed using LS and HS feature sets were similar, except 
for some sensitive phenotypes observed within cluster 8 (LS 
feature set; Figs. 6 and S4 d). The lower amount of clusters 
when the HS feature set is used can mostly be explained by the 
loss of the cell migration feature. Schematics and statistics of the 
whole workflow of our pipeline are described in Fig. S5. A web 
application based on the openBIS data management platform 
(Bauch et al., 2011) illustrates the static and dynamic phenotypes 
associated to each siRNA perturbation using the LS feature set 
(https ://mat -openbis .dbm .unibas .ch :8443 /openbis /webapp /
sinergia /). This platform provides access to the z-score vector 
associated with each siRNA perturbation, as well as to the mean 
MDS. 10 representative images, as well as 10 representative 
time-lapse datasets of penetrant phenotypes (selected using 
the approach described at the beginning of this paragraph), and 
their matched experimental controls are also provided.
Characterization of stage-specific 
neuronal dynamics
Neuronal differentiation involves multiple temporal episodes 
with distinct morphodynamic behaviors that have until now 
been described only qualitatively (da Silva and Dotti, 2002). 
To get quantitative insight into neuronal morphodynamics as-
sociated with different temporal episodes, we took advantage 
of the large control and MKK7-KD dataset from our siRNA 
screen dataset. We studied MDSs associated with sequential 
1-h episodes from our 20-h time-lapse datasets in control cells. 
For scale-free representation, we plotted the temporal evolution 
of the coefficient of variation of a panel of features. Because 
only a fraction of the cell population extends robust neurites, 
we considered the whole population but also gated on the 10% 
of cells with the most robust neurite outgrowth (“all neurites 
extreme length mean feature”). At the whole-cell population 
level (Fig. 7 a), robust initiation of multiple short and branched 
neurites is observed at the onset of differentiation and then de-
creases during a first phase that lasts 7 h. This period is also 
associated with a low soma motility state. After 7  h, a small 
cell population extends a lower number of long unbranched 
neurites (Fig. 7 c), and soma motility steadily increases during 
the remaining period studied. We used a mathematical model 
to identify cells that represent the mean static phenotypes rele-
vant to select temporal bins of the 10% cells with longest neu-
rites (Fig. 7 c). These results quantitatively define two distinct 
phases with different morphodynamic behaviors during the 
neurite outgrowth process.
We then applied the same approach to study the short, 
unstable neurites MKK7-KD phenotype (Fig. 7, b and d). Al-
though short neurites were observed in phase 2, temporal anal-
ysis surprisingly revealed a burst of neurite outgrowth in phase 
1 compared with control cells, which previously had eluded our 
visual inspection of time-lapse movies. Other parameters such 
as neurite and branch numbers, as well as cell migration speed, 
were not affected. These results suggest that MKK7 regulates 
two distinct functions, one occurring at an early and the other at 
a late phase during neurite outgrowth. Feature distribution plots 
again represent the heterogeneous, but statistically significant, 
behavior of cell populations (Fig. 7 e).
Spatiotemporal regulation of RhoA 
activation by two RhoA-specific 
different GAPs
As a proof of concept for the validity of our siRNA screen, 
we sought to explore some relevant neurite outgrowth pheno-
types with respect to spatiotemporal Rho GTPase activation 
dynamics. We focused on an apparently paradoxical result of 
our screen that is centered around RhoA and two RhoA-specific 
GAPs: ARH GAP5 (p190RhoGAP; Ridley et al., 1993; Arthur 
and Burridge, 2001) and DLC1 (deleted in liver cancer; Kim 
et al., 2009; Braun and Olayioye, 2015). Consistently with the 
classic model (Hirose et al., 1998), we observed that RhoA KD 
led to longer neurites, which results in decreased neurite col-
lapse events (Fig. 6, cluster 11). Furthermore, as expected, ARH 
GAP5 KD, which is expected to augment RhoA activity, led to 
short neurites owing to increased neurite collapse (Fig. 6, clus-
ter 3). In marked contrast, DLC1 KD, which is also expected to 
augment RhoA activity, surprisingly led to an increase in neur-
ite outgrowth (Fig. 6, cluster 15). As we had previously shown 
(Fritz et al., 2013), two distinct spatiotemporal RhoA activation 
pools, most likely involving different signaling complexes, are 
associated with growth cone advance and collapse in N1E-115 
cells. We therefore hypothesized that each GAP regulates one 
of the specific RhoA signaling complexes. During growth cone 
advance, RhoA activity localizes to the tip of filopodial F-actin 
bundles (Fig.  8, a and c; and Video  8). In contrast, RhoA is 
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jcb/article-pdf/212/1/91/1594050/jcb_201506018.pdf by Universitat Bern user on 06 March 2025

rho GTPase signaling complexity in neurite outgrowth • Fusco et al. 99
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jcb/article-pdf/212/1/91/1594050/jcb_201506018.pdf by Universitat Bern user on 06 March 2025

JCB • Volume 212 • NumBer 1 • 2016100
activated in retraction fibers at the tip of spontaneously collaps-
ing growth cones (Fig. 8, b and d; and Video 8). Importantly, 
RhoA activity correlates only with its downstream cytoskele-
tal output, myosin light chain phosphorylation (pMLC) during 
growth cone collapse (Fig.  8  e), suggesting that this specific 
process is regulated by Rho kinase. In contrast, low pMLC 
signal was observed during growth cone advance, suggest-
ing that RhoA regulates a distinct effector pathway involved 
in filopodium formation.
To explore the possibility that DLC1 and ARH GAP5 reg-
ulate two distinct spatiotemporal pools of RhoA activity, we 
performed a series of experiments in which we knocked down 
DLC1, ARH GAP5, or both. For these experiments, we selected 
the single siRNAs of which the feature vector most resembled 
the mean MDS. Quantitative PCR indicated potent reduction of 
DLC1 and ARH GAP5 messages in both single and double KD 
(Fig. 9 a). Quantification of steady-state neurite outgrowth levels 
recapitulated the results observed using our CV approach: DLC1 
KD led to increased whereas ARH GAP5 KD led to reduced neu-
rite outgrowth (Fig. 9, b and c). Combined DLC1/ARH GAP5 KD 
led to reduced neurite outgrowth, indicating that, at this specific 
length scale, ARH GAP5 loss of function is dominant over DLC1 
loss of function. Because RhoA spatiotemporal signaling pat-
terns are evident only when the growth cone is examined (see 
Fig. 8 and Fritz et al., 2013), we zoomed in on the cytoskeletal 
and spatiotemporal RhoA activation phenotypes at this specific 
length scale (Fig. 9, d–f). DLC1 KD cells exhibited longer filo-
podia that extended out of the growth cone veil (Fig. 9 d). Rather 
than being focused at the tip of filopodial F-actin bundles, RhoA 
was activated throughout the filopodium (Fig. 9, e and f). This 
suggests that DLC1 functions by locally deactivating RhoA to 
shape its focused activity pattern at the tip of F-actin bundles. In 
DLC1 KD cells, the aberrant RhoA activation pattern then leads 
to longer and more stable filopodia, which favor steady growth 
cone motility (Video 9). Ultimately, this can explain the increased 
neurite outgrowth phenotype observed at the length scale of a 
whole cell. ARH GAP5 KD cells did not display a specific filopo-
dium phenotype as with DLC1 KD (Fig. 9 d). Instead, rather than 
being confined to filopodia, aberrant RhoA activity was potently 
upregulated not only throughout filopodia structures but also 
within the growth cone (Fig. 9, e and f). Furthermore, ARH GAP5 
KD growth cone filopodia exhibited “frozen” morphodynamics, 
suggestive of excessive actomyosin contractility (Video 9). This 
aberrant cytoskeletal state then most likely is highly permissive 
for the increased growth cone collapse frequency observed at 
larger time scales. Double KD of ARH GAP5 and DLC1 revealed 
a hybrid phenotype (Fig. 9, d–f). Long filopodia, with activated 
RhoA throughout the filopodium, were observed as for the DLC1 
KD phenotype. Additional RhoA activity throughout the growth 
cone body was observed as for the ARH GAP5 phenotype. The 
latter pool of aberrant RhoA activity might then lead to excessive 
contractility that favors growth cone collapse, ultimately leading 
to short neurites in double-KD cells (Fig.  9, b and c). These 
results strongly suggest that DLC1 and ARH GAP5 respectively 
regulate filopodia formation and growth cone advance, versus 
actomyosin contractility and growth cone collapse.
Discussion
We present NeuriteTracker, a robust CV pipeline to track mor-
phodynamics of neurons transfected with a genetically en-
coded, nonperturbing, fluorescent morphology reporter that 
can be time-lapsed for hours using air objectives in different 
neuronal-like cell types (Fig. S4, a–c). Automatic identification 
of multiparametric MDSs provides the throughput to analyze 
large time-lapse datasets and detects complex dynamic pheno-
types that are difficult to discern by human visual inspection. 
The benefit of using dynamic features is demonstrated by the 
finding that they stratify phenotypes in additional clusters when 
only static features are considered during the analysis of our 
siRNA screen. Transiently occurring phenotypes can also be 
identified when specific temporal episodes are taken into ac-
count (Fig.  7, c and d), at the expense, however, that larger 
datasets are required to obtain adequate statistical power. Our 
approach identified two discrete neuronal differentiation epi-
sodes with specific morphodynamic states in an unbiased fash-
ion (Fig. 7, a and b). Furthermore, we analyzed a Rho GTPase 
interactome that provides substantial coverage of the cytoskel-
eton regulating machinery controlling neurite outgrowth, with 
all candidates yielding a quantifiable phenotype. Our unbiased 
approach that uses unsupervised clustering of the MDSs uncov-
ers a relatively small phenotypic space that is already visible 
using a small feature set (LS feature set, 19 clusters; HS feature 
set, 15 clusters). The benefit of using a larger feature set is then 
simply that it provides more information about the phenotypes. 
Our results are consistent with the recent finding of a similarly 
small phenotypic space in a perturbation screen targeting cell 
morphology in Drosophila melanogaster hemocytes (Yin et al., 
2013). Importantly, cell migration was also impacted by many 
gene perturbations, revealing that the cytoskeletal regulation 
machinery regulating neurite outgrowth and cell migration is 
to a large extent shared.
Current models of Rho GTPase function in neurite out-
growth posit that Rac1/Cdc42 regulate neurite extension, 
whereas RhoA controls neurite retraction (Hirose et al., 1998; 
da Silva and Dotti, 2002; Govek et al., 2005). However, such 
simple models are not consistent with the apparent complexity 
of Rho GTPase signaling in which GEFs (Rossman et al., 2005), 
GAPs (Moon and Zheng, 2003), and effectors (Pertz, 2010) 
outnumber their cognate Rho GTPases. The rationale behind 
our screen was to explore the significance of the large potential 
Rho GTPase interactome we had previously unveiled using a 
proteomics approach (Pertz et al., 2008; Fig.  3). Indeed, our 
screen revealed that the different proteins of this potential Rho 
GTPase interactome are all important for the neurite outgrowth 
process. Thus, our results suggest a complex scenario in which 
multiple spatiotemporal Rho GTPase signaling networks, most 
likely consisting of GEFs, GAPs, GTPases, effectors, and their 
associated proteins, fine-tune different MPs.
Our proof-of-concept study in which we perturbed two 
RhoA-specific GAPs, which surprisingly led to two distinct 
global neurite outgrowth phenotypes, illustrates how this spa-
tiotemporal signaling complexity will have to be tackled in the 
Figure 6. Hierarchical clustering identifies MDS phenoclusters. Hierarchical clustering of MDSs using the LS feature set. Phenotypic clusters were manually 
sorted by the overall polarity of their MDSs. Representative images of major phenotype classes comprising multiple clusters were identified by a mathe-
matical model described in Materials and methods section Identification of phenocluster representative cells. These representative images do not take into 
account any dynamic feature.
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jcb/article-pdf/212/1/91/1594050/jcb_201506018.pdf by Universitat Bern user on 06 March 2025

rho GTPase signaling complexity in neurite outgrowth • Fusco et al. 101
future. Our data suggest that the two RhoA-specific GAPs regu-
late two distinct spatiotemporal RhoA signaling complexes, one 
involved in regulation of filopodium formation during growth 
cone advance and the other involved in the generation of con-
tractility necessary for growth cone collapse. Our data suggest 
that ARH GAP5 is involved in the regulation of growth cone 
collapse because its perturbation leads to aberrant RhoA activ-
ity not only within unprotrusive filopodia but also within the 
body of the growth cone, which further correlates with frozen 
growth cone morphodynamics and ultimately with short neur -
ites. This conceptually fits well with the function of RhoA in 
growth cone collapse, as exemplified by decreased instance of 
neurite retraction leading to longer neurites in the RhoA KD 
phenotype. Given the different global neurite outgrowth phe-
notype induced by DLC1 KD, we propose that DLC1 regulates 
a RhoA-dependent function distinct from that of ARH GAP5. 
Our data strongly suggest that DLC1 is involved in the fine spa-
tial regulation of the focused RhoA activation pool at the tip of 
F-actin bundles, which most likely involves reaction–diffusion 
systems as previously documented for RhoA (Bement and von 
Dassow, 2014). This specific spatiotemporal RhoA activity pool 
might serve to locally position the formin mDia1 to polymerize 
F-actin to enable filopodia extension (Goh et al., 2012). DLC1 
loss of function might then compromise RhoA deactivation, 
leading to widening of the RhoA activation domain. This in turn 
might lead to aberrant formin regulation and longer and more 
stable filopodia that favor growth cone advance, ultimately 
leading to increased neurite outgrowth. Our ARH AGP5/DLC1 
double-KD data clearly show a hybrid phenotype with charac-
teristic features from both single KDs, strongly suggesting that 
that both GAPs specifically regulate the two distinct cytoskele-
tal processes of growth cone advance and collapse.
Figure 7. Temporal analysis of neuronal dynamics in control and MKK7-KD cells. (a–d) Control and MKK7-KD time-lapse sequences from multiple experi-
mental plates were divided in 19 1-h bins. Coefficient of variation of selected features for each temporal bin for control (a and c) and MKK7 KD (b and d) 
cells. Measurements for the whole-cell population (a and b) and the 10% of cells with the highest neurite extreme length (c and d) are shown. Representative 
HDS graph representations of cells from the tenth percentile at the 1-, 5-, 10-, 15-, and 20-h time points have been identified using a mathematical model 
(Materials and methods; c and d). (e) Feature distributions at the two different time point intervals (1–6 h and 14–20 h). Vertical bars display distribution 
means.
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jcb/article-pdf/212/1/91/1594050/jcb_201506018.pdf by Universitat Bern user on 06 March 2025

JCB • Volume 212 • NumBer 1 • 2016102
These observations have important consequences for 
the interpretation of our global neurite outgrowth phenotypes. 
Many of the neurite outgrowth phenotypes observed in our 
siRNA screen might emerge from aberrant spatiotemporal Rho 
GTPase signaling patterns occurring at the micrometer-length 
scale at which the growth cone functions, which might then 
propagate at the whole-cell scale. The information-rich, multi-
parametric phenotypic signatures extracted by our CV pipeline 
therefore do not allow to unambiguously decipher the spatio-
temporal complexity of Rho GTPase signaling. Deconvolving 
this molecular complexity of Rho GTPase signaling will there-
fore require evaluation of molecular perturbations at multiple 
time and length scales.
Finally, we nonexhaustively discuss some potential Rho 
GTPase signaling networks suggested by our screen (Fig. 10). 
The apparently conflictual phenotypes caused by DLC1 and 
ARH GAP5 KD, which can be understood from the experiments 
performed in Fig. 9, are illustrated in Fig. 10 a. Our approach 
detects a continuum of similar phenotypes for KD of members of 
a well-known Rac1 effector pathway, consisting of the effectors 
Wave2 (W ASF2) and N-W ASP (W ASL), as well as additional 
interactors known to regulate the Arp2/3 complex (Machesky 
et al., 1999; Banzai et al., 2000; Bradley and Koleske, 2009; 
Tahirovic et al., 2010), of which loss of function leads to short 
neurites (Fig. 10 b). Surprisingly, the Rac1 “short neurites” KD 
phenotype (group 1: clusters 1 and 3) is also phenocopied by 
multiple Rac1-specific GEFs: KD of GEFs such as ARH GEF7 
(ten Klooster et al., 2006; β-PIX), DOCK7 (Pinheiro and Gertler, 
2006), or Trio (Fig. 10 c; Bellanger et al., 2000). This suggests 
the existence of multiple complex spatiotemporal Rac1 pathways 
that regulate neurite protrusion. Consistently with the classic 
model in which RhoA regulates myosin contractility to enable 
Figure 8. Dynamics of RhoA activation in advancing and collapsing growth cones. (a and b) Time series showing RhoA activation in advancing and col-
lapsing growth cones from differentiated N1E-115 cells cotransfected with the RhoA2G FRET probe and pLenti-Lifeact-mCherry. (top) Ratio (RhoA activation) 
images. (bottom) Lifeact-mCherry (F-actin) images. Time scale, min:s. Bar, 10 µm. (c and d, top left and right) High-magnification images of advancing 
and collapsing growth cones outlined in the top rows of panels a and b. Red arrowheads point to the RhoA activity zone. (bottom left) Overlay of the 
time series frames showed in the top rows of panels a and b. Red arrows indicate the advance or collapse direction. (bottom right) Overlay images of the 
top-left and right panels of c and d highlight the RhoA activity zone (red) over the filopodia F-actin bundles (green). Red arrowheads point to the RhoA 
activity zone. Bar, 2 µm. (e) High-resolution images of advancing and collapsing growth cones from differentiated N1E-115 cells stained for phalloidin 
and pMLC are shown. Bar, 10 µm.
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jcb/article-pdf/212/1/91/1594050/jcb_201506018.pdf by Universitat Bern user on 06 March 2025

rho GTPase signaling complexity in neurite outgrowth • Fusco et al. 103
collapse (Hirose et al., 1998), ROCK2 KD, a RhoA-effector pro-
tein regulating myosin light chain kinase (MLCK; Amano et al., 
1996; Matsui et al., 1996; Borisoff et al., 2003; Govek et al., 
2005), phenocopies RhoA KD. This is also true for Ect2 KD, a 
GEF that can activate RhoA (Fig. 10 d; Schmidt and Hall, 2002; 
Tsuji et al., 2011), suggesting that Ect2, RhoA, and ROCK2 
Figure 9. Characterization of DLC1, ARH GAP5, and double-KD phenotypes. (a) Quantitative RT-PCR of DLC1, ARH GAP5, and double DLC1 and ARH 
GAP5 KD efficiencies in N1E-115 cells. Mean ± standard deviations from four replicates are shown. (b and c) Quantification of global neurite outgrowth 
phenotypes of the three perturbations. (b) Representative images of α-tubulin–stained N1E-115 KD cells. Inverted black-and-white contrast. (c) Quantifica-
tion of total neurite outgrowth. Images were segmented and quantified using the Metamorph neurite outgrowth plugin. The single siRNAs that produced the 
z-score vector with lowest distance to the mean MDS were used for KD. Population mean ± standard deviations are shown for the whole-cell population (n 
= 150 cells). One-way ANO VA with Bonferroni’s multiple comparison test was used. ***, P < 0.0001. (d) High-resolution growth cone images of phalloi-
din-stained, control, and KD growth cones. All experiments were performed and stained simultaneously and acquired with identical acquisition settings. (e) 
Spatiotemporal RhoA activation patterns in response to the three perturbations. Ratio (RhoA activation), Lifeact-mCherry (F-actin), and overlay representative 
images of both signals are shown. Cells were cotransfected with the RhoA2G FRET probe, a Lifeact-mCherry construct, and the indicated siRNA. Ratio and 
F-actin images are color-coded for signal intensity. Ratio images have been scaled identically across experiments. Overlay images highlight the RhoA activ-
ity zone (red) over the filopodia F-actin bundles (green). (f) Quantification of RhoA activation in the three perturbed states. The RhoA activity zone was calcu-
lated as the pixel percentage of the growth cone RhoA activity area over the growth cone p-domain area. Population mean ± standard deviation are shown 
for n = 5 cells/sample. One-way ANO VA with Bonferroni's multiple comparison test was used. ***, P < 0.0001. Bars: (b) 100 µm; (d) 10 µm; (e) 10 µm.
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jcb/article-pdf/212/1/91/1594050/jcb_201506018.pdf by Universitat Bern user on 06 March 2025

JCB • Volume 212 • NumBer 1 • 2016104
might function together to promote neurite collapse. However, 
this is not phenocopied by KD of other RhoA-specific GEFs 
(ARH GEF3: C3; TRIO: C1; ARH GEF11 and ARH GEF18: C18; 
and ARH GEF2: C19), suggesting additional mechanisms of spa-
tiotemporal RhoA activation. Another novel finding was that KD 
of Cdc42, DOCK9 (a Cdc42-specific GEF; Lin et al., 2006) and 
Cdc42BPB (a Cdc42 effector also called myotonin-related dys-
trophyn kinase [MRCK]; Leung et al., 1998; Chen et al., 1999) 
phenocopy RhoA KD (Fig. 10 d). Because MRCK also regulates 
MLCK and contractility, a DOCK9, Cdc42, and MRCK signal-
ing network might therefore also regulate growth cone collapse. 
It has been shown that the simultaneous phosphorylation of 
MLC, induced by RhoA and Cdc42 via ROCK and MRCK, is 
crucial to promote actomyosin contractility and guarantee proper 
migration (Wilkinson et al., 2005). However, this cooperative 
mechanism between these two GTPases has never been shown in 
neuronal cells. These results suggest that RhoA and Cdc42 may 
cooperate to regulate actomyosin contractility to control growth 
cone collapse and neurite retraction. Our CV approach provides 
a first estimate of the complexity of a spatiotemporal Rho GT -
Pase signaling network during neuronal morphodynamics. This 
provides an initial resource that will allow researchers to gate 
on relevant morphodynamics processes to dissect these complex 
spatiotemporal networks at multiple time and length scales.
Materials and methods
Overview of wetlab experiments
DNA constructions.  For simultaneous expression of Lifeact-GFP and 
NLS-mCherry, we created a bicistronic expression vector consisting 
of Lifeact-GFP, an IRES sequence (derived from a pIRES vector; 
Clontech), and NLS-mCherry (Fig. 1 a). This construct was built using 
InFusion technology (Clontech) and was cloned in a pcDNA3.1(+) eu-
karyotic expression vector (Invitrogen).
Accession numbers.  The accession number for the pcDNA Life-
act-GFP/NLS-mCherry construct is Addgene 69058.
Cell culture and transfection.  N1E-115 neuroblastoma cells 
(American Tissue Culture Collection) were cultured in DMEM sup-
plemented with 10% FBS, 1% l-glutamine, and 1% penicillin/strep-
tomycin. For differentiation, N1E-115 cells were starved for 24 h in 
serum-free Neurobasal medium (Invitrogen) supplemented with 1% 
l-glutamine and 1% penicillin/streptomycin. For the double siR-
NA-mediated KD and plasmid transfection, cells were transfected as 
previously described (Chong et al., 2006), using 400 ng of the plasmid 
pcDNA-Lifeact-GFP-IRES-NLS-mCherry and 20 pmol Stealth Select 
siRNAs (Invitrogen). 1 µl of Transfectin (Bio-Rad) was used as trans-
fection reagent. 48 h posttransfection, cells were starved in Neurobasal 
medium. 72 h posttransfection, cells were detached with Puck’s saline 
and replated on a glass-bottom 24-multiwell plate (MatTek) coated 
with 10 µg/ml laminin (Millipore). Approximately 3 h after seeding, 
cells were immediately used for time-lapse imaging. For transfection 
of both siRNAs and plasmids, cells were transfected as previously de-
scribed (Feltrin et al., 2012). PC12 Neuroscreen-1 subclone cells (Chen 
et al., 2012) were cultured in DMEM with 1% l-glutamine, supple-
mented with 10% horse serum, 5% FBS, and 1% penicillin/streptomy-
cin. Cells were culture on 50 µg/ml collagen solution from bovine skin 
(Sigma-Aldrich). For differentiation, PC12 Neuroscreen-1 cells were 
starved for 24 h in DMEM with 1% l-glutamine supplemented with 
1% glucose, 1% penicillin/streptomycin, and 1% horse serum; 50 ng/
ml NGF was added to the medium to induce differentiation. For PC12 
transfection, cells were transfected as previously described (Chong et 
al., 2006), using 400 ng of the plasmid pcDNA-Lifeact-GFP-IRES-
NLS-mCherry. 0.8 µl of Transfectin (Bio-Rad) was used as transfection 
reagent. 24 h posttransfection, cells were starved in DMEM medium. 
72 h posttransfection, cells were gently detached using a cell scraper 
and replated on a glass-bottom 24-multiwell plate (MatTek) coated 
with 50 µg/ml collagen solution from bovine skin (Sigma-Aldrich).
Immunofluorescence.  N1E-115 cells were washed in PBS, fixed in 
PBS containing 4% PFA (Sigma-Aldrich) for 10 min, and permeabilized  
Figure 10. Selected potential Rho GTPase 
functional networks identified in the RNAi 
screen. Potential Rho GTPase signaling net-
works were identified using Ingenuity Path-
way Analysis based on high-confidence 
protein–protein interactions or literature-based 
knowledge. Representative static phenotypes 
corresponding to the RNAi perturbations are 
shown. Each solid line represents a direct pro-
tein–protein interaction. A legend identifies 
the functions of the proteins in the network. 
(a) Multiple functions for distinct RhoA-spe-
cific GAPs. (b) Rac1-dependent effector path-
way controlling the Arp2/3 complex. KD of 
these proteins all lead to a “short neurites” 
phenotype (group 1: clusters 1, 3, and 4). 
(c) Potential regulation of Rac1 by multiple 
Rac1-specific GEFs. (d) Potential Rho GTPase  
signaling networks regulating myosin light 
chain. All phenotypes correspond to a 
“long and unbranched neurites” phenotype 
(group 4 clusters 11 or 12).
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jcb/article-pdf/212/1/91/1594050/jcb_201506018.pdf by Universitat Bern user on 06 March 2025

rho GTPase signaling complexity in neurite outgrowth • Fusco et al. 105
in PBS containing 1% Triton X-100 for 2 min. Coverslips were washed 
in PBS for 20 min and blocked in 2% BSA and 0.1% Triton X-100 in 
PBS for 15 min. Cells were stained with primary antibodies for 1  h 
(Alpha Tubulin Clone DM1A; Sigma-Aldrich), phospho–myosin light 
chain 2 (Cell Signaling Technology), and then with secondary antibod-
ies for 30 min (Alexa Fluor 555–labeled phalloidin, Alexa Fluor 546 
secondary antibody, and DAPI for 30 min; Invitrogen).
Microscopy and image acquisition.  All experiments were im-
aged using an inverted Eclipse Timicroscope (Nikon) controlled by 
Metamorph software (Universal Imaging). Laser-based autofocus, a 
CFI Plan Apo Lambda 10× (NA 0.45; Nikon) objective, and a Cool-
Snap HQ2 camera (Roper Scientific) were used throughout. For 
live-cell imaging experiments, rapid switching between the GFP and 
mCherry channels was performed using two independent LED lamps 
with excitation at 470 and 585 nm (Cool LED) with a multiband-
pass EGFP/mCherry filter cube (Chroma Technology Corporation). 
All experiments were performed in serum-free Neurobasal medium 
(Invitrogen) supplemented with 1% l-glutamine and 1% penicillin/
streptomycin. For measurements of neurite outgrowth at steady state, 
differentiated, siRNA-transfected cells were replated on 18-mm glass 
coverslips coated with 10 µg/ml laminin. 24 h after plating, the cells 
were fixed and stained with DAPI and an antitubulin antibody. DAPI 
and tubulin images were acquired in a 5 × 5 matrix of fields of view. 
Image analysis was performed using the Metamorph neurite outgrowth 
plugin (Universal Imaging). Selected fields of view were then acquired 
using a CFI Plan Apo Lambda 10× (NA 0.45) objective (Nikon).
For time-lapse imaging of neurite outgrowth dynamics in cells 
expressing Lifeact-GFP and NLS-mCherry, 25,000 transfected N1E-
115 cells were replated on a glass-bottom, 24-well plate (MatTek) 
coated with 10 µg/ml laminin. 4 h after plating, 10 selected fields of 
view per well were imaged in Neurobasal medium (Invitrogen) in a 
heated closed chamber using a CFI Plan Apo Lambda 10× (NA 0.45) 
objective (Nikon). Selection of fields of view was performed using 
Metamorph software. For that purpose, the GFP channel was acquired 
in a 7 × 7 matrix of fields of view for each of the 24 wells. A macro 
was then used postacquisition to select 10 fields of view containing an 
adequate number of cells exhibiting a specific range in fluorescence 
intensities and cell areas. This ensured that each field of view displayed 
a similar number of cells and fluorescence intensities and excluded 
fields of view with cellular debris. The selected fields of view were 
automatically translated in a stage position list, which was used for 
the time-lapse experiment. This resulted in acquisition of 240 fields of 
view in GFP and mCherry channels throughout the 24-well plate every 
12 min for a total of 19.6 h.
For imaging of F-actin and/or RhoA activation dynamics, N1E-
115 cells were imaged using a Plan Apo VC 60× (NA 1.4) objective 
(Nikon) in Neurobasal medium (Invitrogen). Förster resonance energy 
transfer (FRET) imaging was performed as described before (Fritz 
et al., 2013). Ratio imaging analysis was performed with Biosensor 
Processing Software 2.1 (http ://lccb .hms .harvard .edu /software .html). 
Images were thresholded on each channel; shade, background, and 
photobleach corrected; masked; and registered before ratios were 
calculated. Ratio images are color-coded so that warm and cold colors 
represent high and low biosensor activity, respectively.
For time-lapse imaging of neurite outgrowth dynamics in PC-12 
Neuroscreen-1 cells, 80,000 transfected Neuroscreen-1 cells were re-
plated on a glass-bottom, 24-well plate (MatTek) coated with 50 µg/
ml collagen solution from bovine skin (Sigma-Aldrich). 30 min after 
seeding, 50 ng/ml NGF was added to the medium to induce differentia-
tion. After 6 h, selected fields of view per well were imaged in DMEM 
medium (Invitrogen) plus NGF in a heated closed chamber using a CFI 
Plan Apo Lambda 10× (NA 0.45) objective (Nikon).
Identification of a Rho GTPase signaling network.  To identify a 
Rho GTPase signaling network, we took advantage of our recent pro-
teomic analysis of purified neurite and soma fractions of N1E-115 cells 
(Pertz et al., 2008). This dataset provides spatial information about 
the subcellular localization (neurite/soma) for 4,855 proteins through 
the measurement of relative protein enrichment in purified neurite and 
soma fractions. Using Ingenuity Pathways Analysis (IPA) software, 
we first identified Rho GTPases expressed in our cell system (Rac1, 
Cdc42, RhoA, RhoB, RhoC, and RhoG). We then used these as “bait” 
to identify proteins that are documented to interact directly with these 
Rho GTPases by interrogating the Ingenuity Pathways Knowledge 
Base, which is a systemwide database of biological pathways created 
from multiple relationships of proteins, genes, and diseases. Only con-
sidering proteins identified in our proteomics screen to be neurite en-
riched or equally distributed in neurite and soma fractions, we then 
manually sorted these proteins in GEFs, GAPs, RhoA effectors, Rac1 
and Cdc42 effectors, and additional interacting proteins. In a second 
round, we then used these different protein groups as baits to identify 
additional interactors that might work upstream of GEFs and GAPs 
or downstream of effectors. This yielded a Rho GTPase signaling net-
work of 219 proteins (Fig. 3 a), in which most proteins are significantly 
enriched in the neurite. We used Ingenuity analysis pathway software 
to perform a Gene Ontology analysis of the protein ensemble in this 
signaling network (Fig. 3 b). As expected, we observed enrichment of 
Rho GTPase, adhesion, cytoskeleton, and axonal Gene Ontology terms. 
Our approach reveals the existence of a neurite-enriched, Rho GTPase 
signaling network of unanticipated complexity.
Overview of CV analysis
We developed a CV pipeline to segment and track somata and neurites 
in time-lapse datasets. It extracts and stores representative models for 
each cell over time. The pipeline is summarized in Fig. 1 c. From these 
models, we extract features that are used to characterize the morpho-
dynamic phenotype of the cell. The resulting data are stored in an HDS 
representing the cell (Fig. 2 b). For a cell detected at a specific time 
point, the top of the hierarchy represents the detected cell, with subcel-
lular components nucleus, soma, and one or more neurite nodes (Fig. 
S3). The neurite is the trunk attached to the soma (Fig. 2 b, blue seg-
ment), and this can be followed by a tree structure of branches, which 
are any intersection points between neurite elements (Fig. 2 b, green 
segments), and leaf nodes, which are branches situated at the extremity 
of the neurite arborescence (Fig. 2 b, red segments). The CV algorithm 
first segments the nucleus and soma of each cell. Detected cells in each 
frame of the movie are linked using a graph-based tracking algorithm to 
identify individual cells over time. Next, neurites arbors are extracted 
for each detection by segmenting the full cell body and reconstructing 
tree structures corresponding to the neurites. Finally, detected neur-
ites are tracked over time using a similar method as for the somata, 
and the tracked cell is stored in the HDS data structure. Validation of 
soma and neurite segmentation and tracking against human annotated 
ground truth is also shown.
Nucleus segmentation.  We extracted a set of nucleus detections 
{d1,...,dk} from the NLS-mCherry channel of every image (Fig.  1  c) 
using the MSER (Maximally Stable Extremal Regions) feature detector 
(Matas et al., 2004) from the VLFeat library followed by a morpholog-
ical filling operation. The MSER detector is a robust method to find 
regions that are stable over a wide range of thresholds while remaining 
insensitive to contrast change. The minimum and maximum size pa-
rameters were fixed at 70 and 170; all other parameters used default 
settings.
Soma region growing.  Using the segmented nuclei as seed re-
gions, somata segmentation is accomplished using a region growing 
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jcb/article-pdf/212/1/91/1594050/jcb_201506018.pdf by Universitat Bern user on 06 March 2025

JCB • Volume 212 • NumBer 1 • 2016106
and competition algorithm on the Lifeact-GFP channel (Fig. 1 c). For 
every pixel in the image, we compute the geodesic distance to each 
nucleus, combining the local intensity differences and the Euclidean 
distance. For each detected nucleus dk, we defined a potential:
   P  k    (  x )    =     1 _______________  
A exp   (  −   
  (  I  (  x )    −    μ  k   )     
2
 
 _ 2  β   2   σ  k  2    )    + 1
  , 
where   μ  k    and   σ  k    are the mean and standard deviation of the intensities 
of the pixels describing dk, respectively, and β is a multiplicative factor 
of   σ  k    representing a tolerance of variation between the local soma in-
tensity and the local background. The geodesic distance U k associated 
with nucleus dk is defined such that it increases with geometric or inten-
sity distance from the nucleus, as the solution of the Eikonal equation  
   ‖  ∇  U  k   ‖    =  P  k    such that   U  k    (   d   k  )    = 0 . A distance map to all detected nu-
clei is given by  U  (  x )    =  min  k=1,…,K    U  k  (  x )      , which we approximate by com-
puting the solution of    ‖  ∇ U ‖    = P  such that  U  (   d   k  )    = 0 ; for all k where
  P  (  x )    =     1 _______________  
A exp   (  −   
  (  I  (  x )    −    μ  k   )     
2
 
 _ 2  β   2   σ  k  2    )    + 1
   
and the index of the closest region k is decided during the propagation 
of a variant of the Fast Marching algorithm. The main advantage of 
this approach over the original (Benmansour and Cohen, 2009) is that 
the potential values are decided during the propagation. The somata 
segmentations sk are obtained by thresholding   s   k  =  R   k   ∩       {  U <  T  g   }    ∩       {  
D <  T  e   }    , where {Rk} is the V oronoi tessellation associated with U the 
set of nuclei {dk}, the Euclidean distance to the set of nuclei is denoted 
D, and the geodesic and Euclidean thresholds are denoted T g and T e, 
respectively. For all our experiments, we set parameter values A = 1e7, 
β = 1.5, Tg = 2e − 6, and Te = 7.
Detection filtering.  Cell detections   c  t  i  =   (   d  t  i ,  s  t  i  )     are filtered before 
tracking is performed to retain the most reliable detections. Detections 
too close to the image boundary are ignored (distance from nucleus 
centroid <10 pixels). The minimum tolerated nuclei circularity is 0.2, 
and the maximum is 0.85.
Cell tracking and identification.  For each time-lapse sequence, 
an algorithm searches through the full set of cell detections   c  t  i  =   (   d  t  i ,  s  t  i  )     
and iteratively associates the most similar cells to track them over time 
(Fig. 1 c). We construct a graph G = (C,E), where each node   c  t  k    ∈  C  
corresponds to a detection. For each cell   c  t  k   in time step t, edges  e ∈   E  
are formed between   c  t  k   and all past and future detections within a time 
window W. A weight we measuring the similarity between each pair of 
cell detections is assigned to each edge. The weight takes into account 
spatial distance, temporal distance, and differences in shape between 
the two cells. The weight is given by   w  e   =   α ‖    c  t1  k   −  c  t2  l   ‖    + β  |  t1 − t2 |    + γf  
(   v  t1  k  ,  v  t2  l   )    , where   e   k,l   connects   c  t  k   and   c  t  l  , and   v   k   is a shape feature vector 
containing   c  t  k  ’s area, perimeter, mean intensity, and major and minor 
axis lengths of a fitted ellipse. f evaluates differences between a feature 
a extracted from   c  t  k   and   c  t  l   as
  f  (   a   k ,    a   l  )    =   |     a   k  −    a   l  _  a   k  +    a   l    |    .   
According to this formulation, the tracking solution corresponds to the 
set of edges  E’⊂ E  that minimizes the cost   Σ  e∈E’    w  e   .To perform the 
minimization, we use a graph association tracking algorithm that iter -
atively selects an edge with minimum cost and adds it to the tracking 
set until a cost threshold is reached (see below). The output of this 
algorithm is a set of lists of cell detections corresponding to the instan-
taneous location of each neuron over time. Using these lists, we assign 
identities to the detections belonging to each neuron.
Neurite segmentation and association.  Neurites are detected for 
each neuron using a three-step process. First, the image is partitioned 
into regions, one assigned to each tracked cell. The probability of a 
pixel u being assigned a label J t(u) corresponding to neuron i is de-
duced using Bayes’ rule:
  P  (   J  t    (  u )    =  i  |   C  t  ,  I  t    )    =   P  (   C  t  ,  I  t    |   J  t    (  u )    =  i  )     _________________   ∑  η=1  m   P  (   C  t  ,  I  t    |   J  t    (  u )    =  η  )     , 
where It is the image at time  t,  Ct  =     {   c  t  l …   c  t  m  }     is the set of cells 
present in it, and P(Jt(u)) is a uniform distribution. The numerator 
is modeled as the probability of the path L that connects maximally 
the pixel u to the cell
   c  t  i , P  (   C  t  ,  I  t    |   J  t    (  u )    =  i  )    =   |   max  L:u→ c  t  i  ∏       {   l  r   }   ∈L   P  (   I  t    (  r )     |   l  r    )    , 
where lr are indicator variables for the locations forming the path 
L.  Optimal maxima can be found by minimizing the negative likeli-
hood using geodesic shortest path, which produces a partitioning of the 
image into connected components assigned to each cell. Next, a tubu-
larity measurement is computed for each pixel (Sethian et al., 1999) to 
identify likely neurites. Cells that were detected but not tracked have a 
suppressed tubularity value to avoid false positives on the cell bound-
ary. A sigmoid function is fitted to the tubularity score using maximum 
likelihood to obtain a potential P t. A front propagation Fast Marching 
algorithm is simultaneously launched from all cells (Benmansour and 
Cohen, 2009), which solves the Eikonal equation    ‖  ∇  U  t   ‖    =  P  t    and  
   ‖  ∇  L  t   ‖    = 1 .  This yields a geodesic distance map U t which serves 
as the cell body likelihood for each neuron (Fig. 1 c), the associated 
tessellation Vt, and the map of the Euclidian lengths L of the geode-
sics. The geodesic distance map is thresholded with a soft threshold 
Ts, yielding cell bodies for each neuron (Fig. 1 c). Candidate terminal 
points for the neurites are identified as the local maxima of L t in each 
thresholded region. Candidate neurite tracings are found by back-prop-
agating the geodesic distance Ut from the local maxima. Only those 
points for which Ut > Th is above a hard threshold Th are retained. The 
idea is that even if the candidate endpoints detected in the previous step 
are not necessarily all correct, they will quickly converge to interesting 
elongated structures during the back propagation. Finally, a graph rep-
resenting a each full neurite tree is constructed as a Minimum Spanning 
Tree of all back-propagated points, starting from a root touching the 
soma (Fig. 1 c). Neurites less than 30 pixels in length are removed.
Neurite tracking.  Neurites are tracked using the same graph- 
association algorithm used to track cells. Instead of nucleus centroids, 
the positions of the centroids of the neurite trees are tracked. Edges 
connect neurites that emanate from the same cell. The weight w e of 
an edge connecting two neurites   N  t  i   and   N  t’  i      is assigned according to 
spatial distance and a shape measure:
    w  e   =    w  TCL   f  (  TotalCableLength( N  t  i  ) ;  TotalCableLength( N  t’  i   ) )    +          w  Centroid    ‖  Centroid  (   N  t  i  )    − Centroid  (   N  t’  i   )    ‖     +    w  SomaContact   ‖  SomaContract  (   
N  t  i  )    − SomaContract  (   N  t’  i   )    ‖  ,   
where wTCL, wCentroid, and w SomaContract are the weights, TotalCa-
bleLength(N) is the total cable length of a neurite N, Centroid(N) is its 
centroid, SomaContact(N) is its contact point with the soma, and
  f  (   a   k ,    a   l  )    =   |     a   k  −    a   l  _  a   k  +    a   l    |   . 
Unlike the weights used for cell tracking, the neurite weights ig-
nore temporal distance because each neurite is already associated 
to a tracked cell body.
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jcb/article-pdf/212/1/91/1594050/jcb_201506018.pdf by Universitat Bern user on 06 March 2025

rho GTPase signaling complexity in neurite outgrowth • Fusco et al. 107
Graph association tracking.  We construct a graph G = (C,E) 
where each node   c  t  k    ∈ C  corresponds to a detection. For each cell   c  t  k   in 
time step t, edges  e  ∈   E  are formed between   c  t  k   and all past and future 
detections within a time window W. A weight w e is assigned to each 
edge according to spatial and temporal distances, and a shape measure   
w  e     =  α  ‖    c  t1  k   −  c  t2  k   ‖    + β  |  t1 − t2 |     +  γf(   v  t1  k  ,  v  t2  l   )  where   e   k,l   connects   c  t  k   and   
c  t  l  , and   v   k   is a shape feature vector containing   c  t  k  ’s area, perimeter, mean 
intensity, and major and minor axis lengths of a fitted ellipse. f evalu -
ates differences between a feature a extracted from   c  t  k    and   c  t  l   as
   f   (   a   k ,    a   l  )    =    |     a   k ,    a   l  _  a   k  +    a   l      |   . 
To minimize this cost function, we adopt a greedy selection al-
gorithm that iteratively selects an edge with minimum cost    w ^    e    and 
adds it to the set E ′, removing future and past connections from the 
detections   e   k,l   connects. The algorithm iterates until the minimum 
cost    w ^    e    is greater than a threshold T .  The track for neuron  i  is ex-
tracted from E ′ by traversing the graph (C, E ′) and appending linked 
nucleus detections to Xi.
Algorithm 1. Greedy tracking association.  
Start with an empty set E′. 
(1) Repeat. Find edge     e ^     
k,l
  with minimum cost    w ^    e   . Add     e ^     
k,l
   to E′, 
linking detections   d  t1  k    and   d  t2  l   . Remove     e ^     
k,l
   from E. 
(2) If t1 < t2, then: remove edges between   d  t1  k    and future detec-
tions (where t > t1) from E. Remove edges between   d  t2  l    and past detec-
tions (where t < t2) from E.
(3) Else, remove edges between   d  t1  k    and past detections 
(where t < t 1) from E . Remove edges between   d  t2  l    and future detec-
tions (where t > t2) from E.
(4) End if, until    w ^    e   > T .
Soma segmentation validation.  The ability of our method to seg-
ment nuclei and somata from static images was evaluated using a set of 
three hand-annotated movies selected randomly from the screen. The 
data were annotated according to the following protocol. First, anno-
tators should label only cells that appear in the video for a sufficient 
amount of time (five frames). Second, they should label only cells with 
good fluorescent reporter expression. Finally, annotators should care-
fully trace the nucleus and soma of cells that fit this criterion. We then 
used our software to automatically segment the same cells that were 
annotated by experts. For the quality control analysis, the annotation 
and automatic segmentation areas in each frame are divided into re-
gions and assigned a label from the following list: (a) OK: the nucleus/
soma is correctly segmented; (b) FP (false positive): area of nucleus/
soma segmentation that does not exist in the annotation; (c) FN (false 
negative): area of the nucleus/soma annotation that is not recovered by 
the segmentation.
The results of the validation can be found in Fig. S2 and 
Video 3. In total, 790 annotations outlining the nucleus and somata 
were collected from the movies and evaluated.
The automatic nucleus segmentation correctly recovered 94.5% 
of the area annotated as nuclei by the experts. 35.2% of the area of the 
segmentation fell outside of the annotation and was considered to be 
false positive. 5.5% of the area of the annotation was not recovered 
by the segmentation and was considered false negative. In general, 
the nucleus segmentation was very accurate but tuned to be slightly 
larger than the annotation, which explains the difference between the 
false-positive and false-negative rates.
The automatic soma segmentation correctly recovered 81.1% of 
the area annotated as soma by the experts. 19.1% of the segmentation 
area fell outside of the annotation, and was considered to be false pos-
itive. 18.9% of the area of the annotation was not recovered by the 
segmentation and was considered false negative.
Cell-tracking validation.  To evaluate the ability of our method to 
track cells over time, we annotated 20 videos chosen randomly from 
the screen data. The data were annotated according to the following 
protocol. Any cell that our software attempted to track for more than 
five frames was labeled and added to the ground truth. Labeling a cell 
consisted of placing a bounding box around the soma for every frame 
in which the cell is present in the video. We compared these annotations 
to the soma segmentations recovered by our method using a standard 
tracking evaluation procedure (Smith et al., 2008). In each frame, every 
cell is assigned one or more states from the following list: (a) OK: the 
cell is correctly tracked; (b) FP (false positive): a cell was detected 
that does not exist in the annotation; FN (false negative): a cell appear-
ing in the annotation was not detected; (c) MT (multiple tracker): the 
area of cell in the annotation was shared among multiple tracked cells; 
MO (multiple objects): the area of a tracked cell covered more than 
one annotated cells; (d) FI (false identification): an error was made in 
maintaining the identity of a cell over time (e.g., a detected cell label 
switched from one annotated cell to another).
A correct detection occurs if a labeled detection sufficiently 
overlaps the correct corresponding annotation. To establish correspon-
dences between detections and annotations, we use the coverage test 
which checks the F1-measure of the overlap between the area of the 
detection and the annotation:
  F1 =     
2  *       |  d |    ∩       |  a |    ______ d   *     |  d |    ∩       |  a |    ______ a    
  _______________  
    |  d |    ∩       |  a |    ______ d   +     |  d |    ∩       |  a |    ______ a  
  , 
where    |  d |    ∩       |  a |     is the intersection of the detection d with the annota-
tion a, and    |   ∩  |      is the cardinality operation. If the overlap is greater 
than a threshold F1 > 0.33, an association is made between the detec-
tion and the annotation.
The results of the validation can be found in Fig. S2 and 
Video 4. In total, 58,064 total cell detections were evaluated. The au-
tomatic tracking was correct in more than 90% of the cases. The most 
common errors were false detections (6.8%), followed by false identifi-
cations (2.6%). The remaining errors all occurred with <1% frequency.
Neurite validation.  To evaluate the ability of our method to re-
cover neurites, we compared automatic neurite detections against 128 
hand-annotated cells selected randomly from the screen. Each annota-
tion was performed using the TrackEM2 plugin for ImageJ (Schnei-
der et al., 2012). The protocol for the evaluation is a slightly modified 
version of the TRE ES protocol (Cuntz et al., 2010), where a hard de-
cision is made as to whether a pixel belonging to a neurite is correctly 
detected instead of a soft matching score. Each detected neurite pixel 
must fall within a specified distance (σ = 4.5 pixels) of an annotated 
neurite pixel to be counted as correct. If it is outside of this range, 
it is considered a false detection. If no neurite detection falls within 
the specified distance of an annotation, the annotation is considered a 
missed detection. The results of our evaluation show that the neurite 
missed detection rate is just below 30% (Fig. S2 m). The false detection 
rate is ∼27%. The disagreement between the automatic method and 
the annotator might seem high, but it is in line with the disagreement 
between annotators (Fig. S2 n).
Overview of the statistical analysis
Features are extracted from the HDSs representing tracked cells and 
stored in a matrix format. Next, a feature profile is created for each 
siRNA, and the profiles for siRNAs corresponding to the same gene are 
combined to mitigate off-target effects and build a phenotypic signature 
for that gene. A robust subset of the complete set of collected features 
is selected and used for phenotypic clustering. A mathematical model  
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jcb/article-pdf/212/1/91/1594050/jcb_201506018.pdf by Universitat Bern user on 06 March 2025

JCB • Volume 212 • NumBer 1 • 2016108
allows automatic selection of representative cells as prototypical ex-
amples of each phenocluster. Finally, we perform a temporal anal-
ysis comparing the evolution of various features characterizing 
cell behavior over time.
Definition of features describing soma and neurite morphody-
namics.  To generate a list of features that describe cell morphology and 
morphodynamics, we first defined a series of parameters that describe 
cell components, such as the nucleus, soma and neurite, at a given time 
point (see the following paragraphs). In a second step, these parameters 
are then used to compute static and dynamic features.
Definition of nuclei and soma parameters.  Area: area of a nu-
cleus or a soma. Perimeter: perimeter of a nucleus or a soma. Major 
axis length and minor axis length: an ellipse is fitted through the nu-
cleus and the soma. Major axis A and a minor axis B of the ellipse are 
measured. Orientation: orientation of the major axis length A of the 
fitted ellipse (radians). Eccentricity: eccentricity of the fitted ellipse:   
√ 
_______
 ( a   2  −  b   2    )   . Circularity: distance measured between a pure circle and 
the real shape of the nucleus or the soma.
Definition of neurite parameters.  We modeled the neurite arbo-
rescence using different elements. A neurite is considered as the trunk 
of a tree. We define a tree root as the attachment point between the 
neurite and the soma, a branch point as any intersection point between 
neurite elements, and the extreme point as the extremities of the arbo-
rescence. The root is the neurite segment between the tree root and the 
first branch point, a branch is any elementary part of the tree, and a leaf 
is a branch situated at the extremity of the neurite arborescence. Using 
this notation, we extracted a series of parameters that describe the dif-
ferent components of a neurite, and that are shown below. A schematic 
representation of these parameters is shown in Fig. S3.
Extreme length: distances between the tree root and the ex-
treme points. Total cable length: sum of the lengths of the root and 
the branches. Complexity: number of branches in the tree divided by 
the total cable length of the tree. Number of neurites/branches: num-
ber of roots or branches belonging to a cell. Branches length: total 
length of the branches of a cell. Leaf branches length: total length 
of the leaves of a cell.
Definition of static features.  Using the nuclei, soma, and neur -
ite parameters, we created a set of static features, which are described 
below. Nucleus area: nucleus area of the cell per frame, in pixels. Nu-
cleus eccentricity: nucleus eccentricity of the cell per frame. Nucleus 
major axis length: nucleus major axis length of the cell per frame. 
Nucleus minor axis length: nucleus minor axis length of the cell per 
frame. Nucleus orientation: nucleus orientation of the cell per frame. 
Nucleus perimeter: nucleus perimeter of the cell per frame. Nucleus 
circularity: nucleus circularity of the cell per frame. Soma area: soma 
area of the cell per frame. Soma eccentricity: soma eccentricity of the 
cell per frame. Soma major axis length: soma major axis length of the 
cell per frame. Soma minor axis length: soma minor axis length of the 
cell per frame. Soma orientation: soma orientation of the cell per frame. 
Soma perimeter: soma perimeter of the cell per frame. Soma circular-
ity: soma circularity of the cell per frame. Number of neurites: number 
of roots of the cell per frame. All neurites length branches mean: mean 
branch length of the cell per frame. All neurites leaf length branches 
mean: mean leaf length of the cell per frame. All neurites extreme 
length mean: mean extreme length of the cell per frame. Total cable 
lengths per neurite mean: mean neurite total cable length of the cell per 
frame. Complexity per neurite mean: mean neurite complexity of the 
cell per frame. Number of branches per neurite mean: mean number 
of branches per neurite of the cell per frame. Max extreme length per 
neurite mean: mean maximum extreme length per neurite of the cell 
per frame. Total neurites length: sum of the total cable length of each 
neurite of the cell per frame. Total neurites branches: sum of the num-
ber of branches of each neurite of the cell per frame. Total complexity: 
“total neurites branches” divided by “total neurites length” per frame. 
Distance traveled: distance traveled by the soma of the cell between 
two consecutive frames. Speed: instantaneous speed of the cell between 
two consecutive frames. Acceleration: instantaneous acceleration of the 
cell between two consecutive frames.
Definition of dynamic features.  For the dynamic cell features, 
starting from the initial set of static features, we created five layers of 
dynamic cell features such as mean value of the feature through time, 
time a feature expands/contracts, number of inflection points in the 
feature evolution, and frequency of expansion (freq expansion) of a 
feature. Please note that to avoid redundancy, only a subset of dynamic 
features (freq expansion) was taken in account during the analysis of 
our siRNA screen.
Next, we provide the description of the four layers of dy-
namic cell features. Note that in the example we only listed the freq 
expansion features; however, the same set of features is also valid 
for the other four layers.
Let F(t) be the feature value at time t and let ΔF(t) = F(t) 
− F(t − 1) be the feature difference between the two consecu-
tive frames t − 1 and t.
Mean: The mean value of the feature through the entire movie. 
This gives rise to the following features. Time expanding: the number 
of times where ΔF(t) is positive, which is the number of times where 
the feature changes positively. Time contracting: number of times 
where ΔF(t) is negative which is the number of times where the feature 
changes negatively. Number inflection points: number of times where 
ΔF(t) switches from a positive value to a negative value and from a 
negative value to a positive value. Freq expansion: number of times 
where ΔF(t) is positive divided by the number of frames where the 
cell appears. This is the number of times per second where the fea-
ture changes positively.
This gives rise to the following features. Nucleus area freq ex-
pansion: number of times per second where the nucleus area of the 
cell changes positively. Nucleus eccentricity freq expansion: number 
of times per second where the nucleus eccentricity of the cell changes 
positively. Nucleus major axis length freq expansion: number of times 
per second where the nucleus major axis length neurites of the cell 
changes positively. Nucleus minor axis length freq expansion: number 
of times per second where the nucleus minor axis length neurites of 
the cell changes positively. Nucleus orientation freq expansion: number 
of times per second where the nucleus orientation neurites of the cell 
changes positively. Nucleus perimeter freq expansion: number of times 
per second where the nucleus perimeter of the cell changes positively. 
Nucleus Circularity Freq Expansion: Number of times per second 
where the nucleus circularity of the cell changes positively. Soma area 
freq expansion: number of times per second where the soma area of 
the cell changes positively. Soma eccentricity freq expansion: number 
of times per second where the soma eccentricity of the cell changes 
positively. Soma major axis length freq expansion: number of times per 
second where the soma major axis length of the cell changes positively. 
Soma minor axis length freq expansion: number of times per second 
where the soma minor axis length of the cell changes positively. Soma 
orientation freq expansion: number of times per second where the soma 
orientation of the cell changes positively. Soma perimeter freq expan-
sion: number of times per second where the soma perimeter of the cell 
changes positively. Soma circularity freq expansion: number of times 
per second where the soma circularity of the cell changes positively. 
Number of neurites freq expansion: number of times per second where 
the number of neurites of the cell changes positively. Total neurites 
length freq expansion: number of times per second where the total 
neurites length of the cell changes positively. Total neurites branches 
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jcb/article-pdf/212/1/91/1594050/jcb_201506018.pdf by Universitat Bern user on 06 March 2025

rho GTPase signaling complexity in neurite outgrowth • Fusco et al. 109
freq expansion: number of times per second where the total neurites 
branches of the cell changes positively. Total complexity freq expan-
sion: number of times per second where the total complexity of the 
cell changes positively.
Data formatting.  Data extracted by the segmentation and tracking 
steps are stored in a nonvectorial form, which must be converted into a 
matrix for statistical analysis. The analysis is performed on two groups 
of features: “population” features, which provide instantaneous char -
acterizations of a cell or groups of cells; and “dynamic cell” features, 
which characterize a particular cell over time (Fig. 4 a). The popula-
tion features account for several static shape measurements. The pop-
ulation tracking data structure takes the form movie(m).cell(c).time(t).
feature(f), where  m ∈   {  1, … , M }     is the movie index,   c ∈   {  1, … ,  C  m   
}     is the cell index,  t ∈   {  1, … , T }     is the time index, and  f ∈   {  1, … , F 
}     is the feature index. For analysis, it is aggregated and converted to a 
matrix with  T   ∑  
m=1
  
M
     ∑  
c=1
  
 C  m  
   ⋅  rows and F columns; i.e., one row per movie/cell/
frame and one column per feature. The dynamic cell features capture 
both shape and c):feature(f) is aggregated and organized into a matrix 
with  T   ∑  
m=1
  
M
     ∑  
c=1
  
 C  m  
   ⋅  rows and F columns; i.e., one row per movie/cell and one 
column per feature.
Single siRNA profiles.  To characterize the phenotype associated 
with a perturbation, we create a profile for each siRNA using mea-
surements extracted from the movies. Each siRNA profile measures 
whether the siRNA perturbation increased or decreased various mea-
surements with respect to the control (Fig. 4 b). A siRNA profile  r =   {   
r  1  , … ,  r  F   }     is a vector of same dimension as the feature vector described 
above, where   r  f     ∈ ℝ    and  F  denotes the number of features. It is 
constructed by performing a  z -test with 5% significance, comparing for 
each feature the perturbation population against the control population. 
If the statistical test indicates that a significant difference exists, the 
siRNA profile entry for that feature takes the value of the z-score. If the 
difference is insignificant, the profile takes a value of zero. More spe-
cifically, for a feature f the z-score is given by   z  f   ∈   ℝ  and   h  f   ∈   {  0, 1 
}     is the result of the statistical test. If the mean of the two distributions 
are significantly different the result is   h  f   =  1 , otherwise   h  f   =  0 . The 
siRNA profile is given by  ∀ f  =  1, … , F,    r  f     =    h  f    z  f   , where rf denotes 
a signed distance measure between the distribution of the control and 
the perturbed feature. If r f > 0, the polarity is positive and the mean 
feature value is higher for the siRNA than for the control. If r f < 0, the 
polarity is negative and the mean feature value is lower for the siRNA 
than for the control. If rf = 0, the polarity is null and the mean feature 
value is the same for the siRNA and the control.
Morphodynamic signatures.  To mitigate siRNA off-target ef-
fects, we create a gene-specific MDS by “averaging” the profiles of 
the three siRNAs targeting that gene according to the rules described 
below (Fig. 4 c). As previously proposed (Echeverri et al., 2006), if at 
least two of three siRNAs produce the same phenotype, this phenotype 
can be considered on target. We applied this rule to each independent 
feature, if the feature had the same polarity for two of three siRNAs 
(positive, negative, or null), it was considered on target. If all three 
siRNA polarities agree, the MDS score is the mean of the  z -scores. If 
two of three siRNA polarities agree, the MDS is the mean z value of 
the two siRNAs profiles with the same polarity. In all other cases, we 
set the z MDS score to zero. Formally, let   r   i  =   {   r  1  i  , … ,  r  F  i   }     be a siRNA 
profile, where F denotes the number of features, and  i  indexes the three 
siRNAs  i  ∈    {  1, 2, 3 }    . Let  ϵ  ∈    {  − 1, +1 }     be a binary value and  N(ϵ ) =   
|    {  i s . t .  ϵ   r  f  i  > 0 }    |     be the number of siRNA perturbations resulting in 
a positive polarity  (ϵ = 1 )  or negative polarity  (ϵ = − 1 ) . The MDS  
g =   {     g  1  , … ,  g  F   }     is given by the mean siRNA profile of those that have 
the same polarity:
  ∀ f = 1, … , F,  g  F   =   {   
  1 _ N( ϵ   *  )     ∑  
i s.t.  ϵ   *  r  f  i >0
    r  f  i   if N( ϵ   *  ) > 1
   
0                      otherwise
   , 
where
   ϵ   *  = arg     max  ϵ     N(ϵ ) . 
For instance, for a given feature, if two siRNAs yield signifi-
cantly positive z-scores and if the third siRNA molecule yields a neg-
ative z-score, then the feature f value of the gene profile is the mean 
z-score of the two first RNA molecules. In Table 1, we provide an ex-
ample of how the MDS is computed from three siRNA feature profiles.
To determine whether a feature is robust, we checked whether 
the z-score of a feature for the positive MKK7 KN control is consistent 
across at least 65% (LS features) or 90% (HS features) for the 32 ex-
perimental plates (compared with the negative, nontargeting control). 
Formally, let F be the full set of collected features. We reduce this to a 
subset   F ^   =   {    f ^    1    , … ,   f ^     F ^     }    ⊂ F  such that  f ∈  F ^    if, and only if: 
   max   {    |    {  p  s.t.     r  f  p  > 0 }    |  ,  |    {  p  s.t.     r  f  p  < 0 }    |  ,  |    {  p  s.t.     r  f  p  = 0 }    |    }    > PS, 
 where P is the number of plates,   r  f  p   is the siRNA profile of the MKK7 
control in the plate p, and  S  ∈   [ 0, 1 ]  is a threshold value. By setting 
S = 0.65 (LS) and 0.9 (HS), we reduce the size of the feature space to 
23 (LS) and 8 (HS) features.
Phenocluster identification.  We used bottom-up hierarchical 
clustering (Bakal et al., 2007; Yin et al., 2013) to identify sets of genes 
that share common MDSs. To accomplish this, we first defined a dis-
tance metric D(i,j) allowing us to compare pairs of MDSs gi and gj. We 
used a straightforward method based on the MDS polarity. The pro-
posed distance depends on the signed distance between the gene pro-
files: D(i,j) = D(sign(gi),sign(gj)), where  sign  (   g   i  )    =    {  sign  (   g  1  i   )   , … , sign  
(   g  F  i   )   g }   ,  sign  (   g  f  i    )    = 0  if    g  f  i  = 0, sign  (   g  f  i    )    = 1 if   g  f  i  > 0,  and sign  (   g  f  i    
)    = − 1 if   g  f  i  < 0 . In other words, two genes have a similar phenotype 
if their features have the same polarity. This can be computed by using 
the L0 distance:
  D(i, j ) =   1 __ F    |    {  f s . t .  sign( g  f  i  ) ≠ ( g  f  j  ) }    |    =   1 __ F    ‖  sign( g  f  i  ) − ( g  f  j  )  ‖   ο ,  
which gives a percentage of features that are matching between two genes. 
Evaluation of the distance between two clusters was performed by comput-
ing the L0 distance between the two mean points of the clusters. We set the 
minimum number of genes per cluster to three, with the consequence that 
if a cluster is composed of fewer than three genes, we consider these genes 
as unclustered. The number of clusters also depends on the dendrogram 
Table 1. An example of how the MDS is computed from three siRNA feature profiles
Profiles 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
siRNA1 0 0 0 0 0 −15 10 0 2 −12
siRNA2 0 0 0 5 8 8 8 −6 −11 −10
siRNA3 0 10 −5 −8 10 4 6 −4 −15 −8
MDS 0 0 0 0 9 6 8 −5 −13 −10
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jcb/article-pdf/212/1/91/1594050/jcb_201506018.pdf by Universitat Bern user on 06 March 2025

JCB • Volume 212 • NumBer 1 • 2016110
threshold, which gives the minimum percentage of matching features in 
each cluster. This percentage is directly connected to the L0 distance. If this 
threshold is too high, there are few clusters; if the threshold is too low, the 
clusters are too noisy. We came to a compromise by iteratively testing dif-
ferent threshold values, visually evaluating the quality of both the clusters 
and the identified phenotypes by inspection of HDS graph representations 
of cells identified using a mathematical model to select penetrant pheno-
types. The mathematical model is described below. We then chose the 60% 
(LS feature set) and 70% (HS feature set) threshold, implying that 60% or 
70% of the features match in a given cluster.
Identification of phenocluster representative cells.  For each phe-
nocluster, we identified representative cells with a highly penetrant 
phenotype. We then provide static or time-lapse datasets using graph 
representations of the HDS extracted for these cells (Video 5). For that 
purpose, we first identified the single siRNA profile that has the high-
est similarity with the mean MDS. We then selected the single siRNA 
profile with the highest number of on-target features. We then selected 
cells with a highly penetrant phenotype. More specifically, for a given 
gene i, we looked for a cell   x   n ^    i     ∈    {   x  1  i  , … ,  x  N  i   }    , where   x  n  i     ∈    {   x  n,1  i  , … ,  
x  n,F  i   }    , such that this cell has features strongly consistent with the cen-
troid   x ¯   . The optimization formulation is:
   n ^   = arg     max  n    Σ  f=1  F     
sign( g  f  i  )  x  f,n  i    −   x ¯    f  
  __________  σ  f    , 
where   σ  f    is the standard deviation of the feature f (computed from 
all the data),    x ¯    f    is the centroid value of the feature f for the control, 
sign    [   g  f  i  ]    =  1  if the gene profile   g  f  i   is positive, and sign    [   g  f  i  ]    =   −  1  
otherwise. For this analysis, we focused on a subset of features that 
are easily visually interpretable. Specifically, we used the follow-
ing features: number of neurites, total cable length per neurite mean, 
and number of branches.
Temporal analysis of neurite outgrowth dynamics.  We used our 
large amount of time-lapse datasets of control and MKK7-KD cells 
(320 movies each acquired in 32 independent experiments) to analyze 
the morphodynamic behavior associated with specific temporal epi-
sodes during the neurite outgrowth process. For this, we divided each 
time-lapse series (of ∼20 h) into 20 temporal bins and computed the 
mean of the feature value in each bin. To compare the temporal evolu-
tion of a feature, we normalized the feature value by its variance. Let  
A  =     {   x  1  , … ,  x  N   }   ,   where   x  n   ∈ ℝ , be the values of a feature for all the 
cells of a control. We denote by μ and σ 2 the mean and variance of A, 
respectively. Let   A   b    =    {   x  1  b , … ,  x  N  b   }    , where   x  n  b  ∈ ℝ is a subset   A   b  ⊂ A  
such that   x  n  b   is restricted in the temporal bin b. Similarly, we denote by 
μb and   σ  b  2   the mean and variance of Ab, respectively. We normalized the 
data as follows:
   x  n  b  ←    
 x  n  b  − μ
 ____ σ  . 
Additionally, we illustrated this temporal analysis by selecting repre-
sentative cells in Fig. 5 (A and B). Each cell is automatically selected 
from a model. Let  X  =      {   X  1  , … ,    X  F   }     be a model for a targeted cell, 
where   X  f   ∈   ℝ  is chosen regarding the variation of μ b in the analysis 
of Fig. 5 (A and B). The method consists of selecting the cell   x   n ^     ∈   {   x  1  
, … ,  x  N   }    , where   x  n   ∈    ℝ   F  , such that   n ^   = arg  min  n      ‖    x  n   − X ‖     2  . To filter the 
cells without neurite, we gated on the 10% cells with longest neurites.
Online supplemental material
Fig. S1 shows high-content live-cell imaging platform and RNAi 
pipeline. Fig. S2 shows an evaluation of the automatic soma and 
neurite segmentation and soma tracking. Fig. S3 shows the definition 
of parameters for feature extraction. Fig. S4 shows PC-12 cell neuronal 
differentiation tracking and segmentation and hierarchical clustering 
of MDSs using the HS feature sets. Fig. S5 shows a summary of 
workflow and statistics of the RNAi screen. Video 1 is raw movies of 
Lifeact-GFP/NLS-mCherry channels in N1E-115 cells. Video 2 shows 
dynamic visualization of different steps in the computer vision pipeline. 
Video 3 shows nuclei and soma segmentation validation. Video 4 shows 
soma detection and tracking validation. Video 5 shows HDS-modeled 
graph representations of five global phenotypical classes. Video  6 
shows HDS-modeled graph representations of MDSs of dynamic 
short neurite phenotypes in the LS map. Video 7 shows HDS-modeled 
graph representations of MDSs of dynamic long and branched neurite 
phenotypes in the LS map. Video 8 shows RhoA activation dynamics 
in advancing and collapsing growth cone in N1E-115 cells. Video  9 
is high-resolution time-lapse imaging of DLC1 and ARH GAP5 KD 
growth cones in N1E-115 cells. Table S1 lists a description of all 
siRNAs in the RNAi library. Online supplemental material is available 
at http ://www .jcb .org /cgi /content /full /jcb .201506018 /DC1.
Acknowledgments
We are grateful to Chris Bakal for constructive comments 
on the manuscript.
This work was supported by a Swiss National Science Foundation 
Sinergia grant to O. Pertz, P. Fua, and F. Fleuret and by Swiss Na-
tional Science Foundation and International Foundation for Research 
in Paraplegia grants to O. Pertz.
The authors declare no competing financial interests.
Author contributions: O.  Pertz and K.  Smith initially conceived the 
study; L. Fusco performed all experiments; K. Smith, F. Benmansour, 
G. Gonzalez, and P. Fua led the image segmentation effort; R. Lefort 
and F. Fleuret led the statistical analysis effort; C. Barillari and B. Rinn 
designed the OpenBis-based image database; O. Pertz and L. Fusco 
designed and interpreted the FRET validation experiments. O. Pertz, 
K. Smith, L. Fusco, and R. Lefort wrote the paper.
Submitted: 3 June 2015
Accepted: 8 December 2015
References
Amano, M., M. Ito, K. Kimura, Y . Fukata, K. Chihara, T. Nakano, Y . Matsuura, 
and K.  Kaibuchi. 1996. Phosphorylation and activation of myosin by 
Rho-associated kinase (Rho-kinase). J.  Biol. Chem. 271:20246–20249. 
http ://dx .doi .org /10 .1074 /jbc .271 .34 .20246
Arthur, W.T., and K.  Burridge. 2001. RhoA inactivation by p190RhoGAP 
regulates cell spreading and migration by promoting membrane 
protrusion and polarity. Mol. Biol. Cell. 12:2711–2720. http ://dx .doi .org 
/10 .1091 /mbc .12 .9 .2711
Bakal, C., J. Aach, G. Church, and N. Perrimon. 2007. Quantitative morphological 
signatures define local signaling networks regulating cell morphology. 
Science. 316:1753–1756. http ://dx .doi .org /10 .1126 /science .1140324
Banzai, Y ., H.  Miki, H.  Yamaguchi, and T.  Takenawa. 2000. Essential role 
of neural Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome protein in neurite extension in 
PC12 cells and rat hippocampal primary culture cells. J.  Biol. Chem. 
275:11987–11992. http ://dx .doi .org /10 .1074 /jbc .275 .16 .11987
Bauch, A., I.  Adamczyk, P.  Buczek, F.J.  Elmer, K.  Enimanev, P.  Glyzewski, 
M. Kohler, T. Pylak, A. Quandt, C. Ramakrishnan, et al. 2011. openBIS: a 
flexible framework for managing and analyzing complex data in biology 
research. BMC Bioinformatics. 12:468. http ://dx .doi .org /10 .1186 /1471 
-2105 -12 -468
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jcb/article-pdf/212/1/91/1594050/jcb_201506018.pdf by Universitat Bern user on 06 March 2025

rho GTPase signaling complexity in neurite outgrowth • Fusco et al. 111
Bellanger, J.M., C. Astier, C. Sardet, Y . Ohta, T.P. Stossel, and A. Debant. 2000. 
The Rac1- and RhoG-specific GEF domain of Trio targets filamin to 
remodel cytoskeletal actin. Nat. Cell Biol. 2:888–892. http ://dx .doi .org 
/10 .1038 /35046533
Bement, W.M., and G.  von Dassow. 2014. Single cell pattern formation and 
transient cytoskeletal arrays. Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 26:51–59. http ://dx 
.doi .org /10 .1016 /j .ceb .2013 .09 .005
Benmansour, F., and L.  Cohen. 2009. Fast object segmentation by growing 
minimal paths from a single point on 2D or 3D images. J. Math. Imaging 
Vis. 33:209–221. http ://dx .doi .org /10 .1007 /s10851 -008 -0131 -0
Borisoff, J.F., C.C.  Chan, G.W.  Hiebert, L.  Oschipok, G.S.  Robertson, 
R. Zamboni, J.D. Steeves, and W. Tetzlaff. 2003. Suppression of Rho-
kinase activity promotes axonal growth on inhibitory CNS substrates. 
Mol. Cell. Neurosci. 22:405–416. http ://dx .doi .org /10 .1016 /S1044 
-7431(02)00032 -5
Bradley, W.D., and A.J.  Koleske. 2009. Regulation of cell migration and 
morphogenesis by Abl-family kinases: emerging mechanisms and 
physiological contexts. J. Cell Sci. 122:3441–3454. http ://dx .doi .org /10 
.1242 /jcs .039859
Braun, A.C., and M.A. Olayioye. 2015. Rho regulation: DLC proteins in space 
and time. Cell. Signal. 27:1643–1651. http ://dx .doi .org /10 .1016 /j .cellsig 
.2015 .04 .003
Chen, J.Y ., J.R.  Lin, K.A.  Cimprich, and T.  Meyer. 2012. A two-dimensional 
ERK-AKT signaling code for an NGF-triggered cell-fate decision. Mol. 
Cell. 45:196–209. http ://dx .doi .org /10 .1016 /j .molcel .2011 .11 .023
Chen, X.Q., I. Tan, T. Leung, and L. Lim. 1999. The myotonic dystrophy kinase-
related Cdc42-binding kinase is involved in the regulation of neurite 
outgrowth in PC12 cells. J. Biol. Chem. 274:19901–19905. http ://dx .doi 
.org /10 .1074 /jbc .274 .28 .19901
Chong, K.W., A.Y .  Lee, E.S.  Koay, S.J.  Seet, and N.S.  Cheung. 2006. pH 
dependent high transfection efficiency of mouse neuroblastomas using 
TransFectin. J. Neurosci. Methods. 158:56–63. http ://dx .doi .org /10 .1016 
/j .jneumeth .2006 .05 .017
Cuntz, H., F. Forstner, A. Borst, and M. Häusser. 2010. One rule to grow them all: 
a general theory of neuronal branching and its practical application. PLOS 
Comput. Biol. 6:e1000877. http ://dx .doi .org /10 .1371 /journal .pcbi .1000877
da Silva, J.S., and C.G. Dotti. 2002. Breaking the neuronal sphere: regulation of 
the actin cytoskeleton in neuritogenesis. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 3:694–704. 
http ://dx .doi .org /10 .1038 /nrn918
Echeverri, C.J., P.A. Beachy, B. Baum, M. Boutros, F. Buchholz, S.K. Chanda, 
J.  Downward, J.  Ellenberg, A.G.  Fraser, N.  Hacohen, et al. 2006. 
Minimizing the risk of reporting false positives in large-scale RNAi screens. 
Nat. Methods. 3:777–779. http ://dx .doi .org /10 .1038 /nmeth1006 -777
Feltrin, D., L.  Fusco, H.  Witte, F.  Moretti, K.  Martin, M.  Letzelter, E.  Fluri, 
P. Scheiffele, and O. Pertz. 2012. Growth cone MKK7 mRNA targeting 
regulates MAP1b-dependent microtubule bundling to control neurite 
elongation. PLoS Biol. 10:e1001439. http ://dx .doi .org /10 .1371 /journal 
.pbio .1001439
Fritz, R.D., M.  Letzelter, A.  Reimann, K.  Martin, L.  Fusco, L.  Ritsma, 
B. Ponsioen, E. Fluri, S. Schulte-Merker, J. van Rheenen, and O. Pertz. 
2013. A versatile toolkit to produce sensitive FRET biosensors to 
visualize signaling in time and space. Sci. Signal. 6:rs12. http ://dx .doi 
.org /10 .1126 /scisignal .2004135
Goh, W.I., K.B.  Lim, T.  Sudhaharan, K.P.  Sem, W.  Bu, A.M.  Chou, and 
S.  Ahmed. 2012. mDia1 and W A VE2 proteins interact directly with 
IRSp53 in filopodia and are involved in filopodium formation. J.  Biol. 
Chem. 287:4702–4714. http ://dx .doi .org /10 .1074 /jbc .M111 .305102
Govek, E.E., S.E. Newey, and L. Van Aelst. 2005. The role of the Rho GTPases 
in neuronal development. Genes Dev. 19:1–49. http ://dx .doi .org /10 .1101 
/gad .1256405
Hirose, M., T. Ishizaki, N. Watanabe, M. Uehata, O. Kranenburg, W.H. Moolenaar, 
F. Matsumura, M. Maekawa, H. Bito, and S. Narumiya. 1998. Molecular 
dissection of the Rho-associated protein kinase (p160ROCK)-regulated 
neurite remodeling in neuroblastoma N1E-115 cells. J.  Cell Biol. 
141:1625–1636. http ://dx .doi .org /10 .1083 /jcb .141 .7 .1625
Kim, T.Y ., D.  Vigil, C.J.  Der, and R.L.  Juliano. 2009. Role of DLC-1, a 
tumor suppressor protein with RhoGAP activity, in regulation of the 
cytoskeleton and cell motility. Cancer Metastasis Rev. 28:77–83. http ://
dx .doi .org /10 .1007 /s10555 -008 -9167 -2
Lefort, R., L. Fusco, O. Pertz, and F. Fleuret. 2015. Machine learning-based tools 
to model and to remove the off-target effect. Pattern Anal. Appl. http ://dx 
.doi .org /10 .1007 /s10044 -015 -0469 -z
Leung, T., X.Q. Chen, I. Tan, E. Manser, and L. Lim. 1998. Myotonic dystrophy 
kinase-related Cdc42-binding kinase acts as a Cdc42 effector in 
promoting cytoskeletal reorganization. Mol. Cell. Biol. 18:130–140. http 
://dx .doi .org /10 .1128 /MCB .18 .1 .130
Lin, Q., W. Yang, D. Baird, Q. Feng, and R.A. Cerione. 2006. Identification of 
a DOCK180-related guanine nucleotide exchange factor that is capable 
of mediating a positive feedback activation of Cdc42. J.  Biol. Chem. 
281:35253–35262. http ://dx .doi .org /10 .1074 /jbc .M606248200
Machesky, L.M., R.D.  Mullins, H.N.  Higgs, D.A.  Kaiser, L.  Blanchoin, 
R.C.  May, M.E.  Hall, and T.D.  Pollard. 1999. Scar, a W ASp-related 
protein, activates nucleation of actin filaments by the Arp2/3 complex. 
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 96:3739–3744. http ://dx .doi .org /10 .1073 /
pnas .96 .7 .3739
Matas, J., D.A. Kaiser, L. Blanchoin, R.C. May, M.E. Hall, and T.D. Pollard. 
2004. Robust Wide baseline Stereo from Maximally Stable Extremal 
Regions. British Machine Vision Computing. 22:761–767. http ://dx .doi 
.org /10 .1016 /j .imavis .2004 .02 .006
Matsui, T., M.  Amano, T.  Yamamoto, K.  Chihara, M.  Nakafuku, M.  Ito, 
T.  Nakano, K.  Okawa, A.  Iwamatsu, and K.  Kaibuchi. 1996. Rho-
associated kinase, a novel serine/threonine kinase, as a putative target for 
small GTP binding protein Rho. EMBO J. 15:2208–2216.
Moon, S.Y ., and Y .  Zheng. 2003. Rho GTPase-activating proteins in cell 
regulation. Trends Cell Biol. 13:13–22. http ://dx .doi .org /10 .1016 /S0962 
-8924(02)00004 -1
Nadarajah, B., and J.G. Parnavelas. 2002. Modes of neuronal migration in the 
developing cerebral cortex. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 3:423–432. http ://dx .doi 
.org /10 .1038 /nrn845
Pertz, O.  2010. Spatio-temporal Rho GTPase signaling—Where are we now? 
J. Cell Sci. 123:1841–1850. http ://dx .doi .org /10 .1242 /jcs .064345
Pertz, O.C., Y . Wang, F. Yang, W. Wang, L.J. Gay, M.A. Gristenko, T.R. Clauss, 
D.J. Anderson, T. Liu, K.J. Auberry, et al. 2008. Spatial mapping of the 
neurite and soma proteomes reveals a functional Cdc42/Rac regulatory 
network. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 105:1931–1936. http ://dx .doi .org 
/10 .1073 /pnas .0706545105
Pinheiro, E.M., and F.B. Gertler. 2006. Nervous Rac: DOCK7 regulation of axon 
formation. Neuron. 51:674–676. http ://dx .doi .org /10 .1016 /j .neuron .2006 
.08 .020
Ridley, A.J., A.J. Self, F. Kasmi, H.F. Paterson, A. Hall, C.J. Marshall, and C. Ellis. 
1993. rho family GTPase activating proteins p190, bcr and rhoGAP show 
distinct specificities in vitro and in vivo. EMBO J. 12:5151–5160.
Riedl, J., A.H.  Crevenna, K.  Kessenbrock, J.H.  Yu, D.  Neukirchen, M.  Bista, 
F. Bradke, D. Jenne, T.A. Holak, Z. Werb, et al. 2008. Lifeact: a versatile 
marker to visualize F-actin. Nat. Methods. 5:605–607. http ://dx .doi .org 
/10 .1038 /nmeth .1220
Rossman, K.L., C.J. Der, and J. Sondek. 2005. GEF means go: turning on RHO 
GTPases with guanine nucleotide-exchange factors. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell 
Biol. 6:167–180. http ://dx .doi .org /10 .1038 /nrm1587
Schmidt, A., and A. Hall. 2002. Guanine nucleotide exchange factors for Rho 
GTPases: turning on the switch. Genes Dev. 16:1587–1609. http ://dx .doi 
.org /10 .1101 /gad .1003302
Schneider, C.A., W.S. Rasband, and K.W. Eliceiri. 2012. NIH Image to ImageJ: 
25 years of image analysis. Nat. Methods. 9:671–675. http ://dx .doi .org 
/10 .1038 /nmeth .2089
Sethian, J., P.S.  Linsley, L.  Lum, Y .  Ma, B.  Mathey-Prevot, D.E.  Root, and 
D.M.  Sabatini. 1999. Level Set Methods and Fast Marching Methods 
Evolving Interfaces in Computational Geometry, Fluid Mechanics, 
Computer Vision, and Materials Science. Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge, UK. 400 pp.
Smith, K., S. Ba, D. Gatica-Perez, and J.M. Odobez. 2008. Tracking the visual 
focus of attention for a varying number of wandering people. IEEE Trans. 
Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. 30:1212–1229.
Tahirovic, S., F. Hellal, D. Neukirchen, R. Hindges, B.K. Garvalov, K.C. Flynn, 
T.E.  Stradal, A.  Chrostek-Grashoff, C.  Brakebusch, and F.  Bradke. 
2010. Rac1 regulates neuronal polarization through the W A VE complex. 
J. Neurosci. 30:6930–6943. http ://dx .doi .org /10 .1523 /JNE UROSCI .5395 
-09 .2010
ten Klooster, J.P., Z.M. Jaffer, J. Chernoff, and P.L. Hordijk. 2006. Targeting and 
activation of Rac1 are mediated by the exchange factor beta-Pix. J. Cell 
Biol. 172:759–769. http ://dx .doi .org /10 .1083 /jcb .200509096
Tsuji, T., C. Higashida, Y . Yoshida, M.S. Islam, M. Dohmoto, K. Koizumi, and 
H. Higashida. 2011. Ect2, an ortholog of Drosophila’s pebble, negatively 
regulates neurite outgrowth in neuroblastoma × glioma hybrid NG108-
15 cells. Cell. Mol. Neurobiol. 31:663–668. http ://dx .doi .org /10 .1007 /
s10571 -011 -9668 -3
Wilkinson, S., H.F. Paterson, and C.J. Marshall. 2005. Cdc42-MRCK and Rho-
ROCK signalling cooperate in myosin phosphorylation and cell invasion. 
Nat. Cell Biol. 7:255–261. http ://dx .doi .org /10 .1038 /ncb1230
Yin, Z., A.  Sadok, H.  Sailem, A.  McCarthy, X.  Xia, F.  Li, M.A.  Garcia, 
L. Evans, A.R. Barr, N. Perrimon, et al. 2013. A screen for morphological 
complexity identifies regulators of switch-like transitions between 
discrete cell shapes. Nat. Cell Biol. 15:860–871. http ://dx .doi .org /10 
.1038 /ncb2764
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jcb/article-pdf/212/1/91/1594050/jcb_201506018.pdf by Universitat Bern user on 06 March 2025
