Communicative & Integrative Biology
ISSN: (Print) 1942-0889 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/kcib20
Filopodia
Nanodevices that sense nanotopographic ECM cues to orient neurite outgrowth
Olivier Pertz
To cite this article: Olivier Pertz (2011) Filopodia, Communicative & Integrative Biology, 4:4,
436-439, DOI: 10.4161/cib.15325
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.4161/cib.15325
Copyright © 2011 Landes Bioscience
Published online: 01 Jul 2011.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 560
View related articles 
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=kcib20
Communicative & Integrative Biology 4:4, 436-439; July/August 2011; ©2011 Landes Bioscience
436 C ommunicative & Integrative Biology  V olume 4 Issue 4
Addendum to: Jang KJ, Kim MS, Feltrin D, Jeon 
NL, Suh KY, Pertz O. Two distinct filopodia popu-
lations at the growth cone allow to sense nano-
topographical extracellular matrix cues to guide 
neurite outgrowth. PLoS One 2010; 5:15966. 
PMID: 21209862; DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone
Key words:  neurite outgrowth, filopo -
dium, actin dynamics, microfabrication, 
live cell imaging
Abbreviations:  ECM, extracellular 
matrix
Submitted: 03/02/11
Accepted: 03/02/11
DOI: 10.4161/cib.4.2.15325
*Correspondence to: Olivier Pertz;  
Email: Olivier.pertz@unibas.ch
T
he processes of neuronal outgrowth 
and guidance have typically been 
studied in classic 2D cell culture systems 
that do not recapitulate topographical 
cues present in the in vivo extracellular 
matrix (ECM). Using microfabrication 
techniques, we mimicked this ECM 
topography by presenting laminin on a 
line pattern with nanometric size fea-
tures. We found that this not only allows 
neurite orientation but also robust out-
growth. This depends on dynamic sto -
chastic sensing of the line pattern by 
growth cone filopodia which allows 
them to probe their surrounding space by 
measuring the extent of filopodial adhe-
sion surface with the ECM. Filopodium 
alignment with an ECM line allows to 
the formation of a robust F-actin net-
work that leads to its stabilization, allow-
ing steady neurite extension along the 
line pattern. Because this model system 
allows exquisitely stereotypic filopodial 
dynamics, this opens up the possibil-
ity to easily study the spatio-temporal 
dynamics of the signaling networks that 
regulate this prototypic growth cone 
navigation system.
Proper functioning of the nervous system 
requires functional connections between 
neurons. This requires undifferentiated 
neurons to extend neurites that will sub-
sequently differentiate in axons and den -
drites to wire the adult brain. Most of 
what we know about the biology of neurite 
outgrowth has been performed in classic 
2-dimensional culture dishes, which do 
not recapitulate the in vivo occurring, 
3-dimensional environments in which the 
extracellular matrix assembles structures 
Filopodia
Nanodevices that sense nanotopographic ECM cues to orient neurite outgrowth
Olivier Pertz
Institute for Biochemistry and Genetics; Dept. Biomedicine; University of Basel; Basel, Switzerland
with specific geometries and size features 
on the order of tens of nanometers to 
micrometers. By example, laminin can 
build fibrillar tracks on the surface of 
Schwann cells which are important for 
neurite outgrowth and neuronal regen-
eration after a lesion. 1 Such ECM tracks 
display submicrometer size features. It is 
therefore reasonable to assume that pre-
cise topology of the ECM is important 
for the cell’s ability to interact with and 
perceive its environment.2 However, the 
importance of the ECM organization and 
topography at the micro- and nanome-
ter scale is still poorly understood. With 
recent advances in microfabrication tech-
niques,3,4 this now becomes accessible, and 
multiple reports document that exten -
sion of neuronal processes from neurons 
are highly dependent on the geometrical 
topology of the ECM.
We and others show that when ECM 
cues that induce neurite outgrowth are 
presented on a number of different scaf-
folds such as linear ridge groove patterns, 5 
aligned nanofibers, 6 or porous structures, 7 
all having size features on the order of 
hundreds of nanometers, neuronal pro-
cesses can read these patterns and align 
along them. This is remarkable since, in 
these experiments, the size features of 
these structures are smaller than the neu-
ronal process and the growth cone itself, 
excluding the possibility that orientation 
of outgrowth is the result of sterically con-
fining the neurite to a specific geometrical 
domain. This suggests that the neurite 
is able to sense and read such nanoto-
pographic cues, most likely through its 
growth cone. Another surprising result 
is that such nanopatterned 
 s
ubstrates not 
www.landesbioscience.com C ommunicative & Integrative Biology  437
ArtICLe Addendum
actin flow exceeds actin assembly at the 
filopodium tip.11 At a global cell level, the 
consequence of filopodium stabilization is 
that it allows for steady neurite outgrowth, 
rather than the neurite protrusion-retrac-
tion cycles observed on the classic 2D sub-
strate. This explains how directionality is 
coupled to robust neuronal outgrowth. 
Schematics of the dynamic filopodium 
behavior underlying the sensing process is 
pictured in Figure 1.
An important clue that the stochas -
tic search and capture mechanism we 
describe is relevant, is that in vivo imag-
ing of neuronal guidance, 12 reveals similar 
streamlined growth cones with lateral filo -
podial scanning as we observe on the line 
substrate (Fig. 2 ). This clearly contrasts 
with the flat, veil-like growth cones that 
are typically observed in 2D substrates. 
Our data clearly suggests that the key fea-
ture of stochastic search and capture per -
formed by filopodia is that it serves as an 
“alignment sensor” for the line substrate. 
This is possible because the filopodium 
substrates. Sensing of the line substrate 
occurs through a dynamic, stochastic 
search and capture mechanism performed 
by the growth cone filopodia. The filopo-
dia explore their environment through a 
highly stereotypic behavior involving pro-
trusion-retraction cycles that are coupled 
with lateral scanning motions, with a typi-
cal filopodium lifecycle on the order of 5 
to 10 min. Because of their size features 
(roughly 2–3 μm length and 200–300 
nm width), filopodia will display different 
extents of interaction with the line sub-
strate (width: 350 nm) depending if they 
are aligned or not with a pattern ridge. We 
observe that when a filopodium aligns with 
the line substrate, this leads to its stabiliza-
tion for hours in the direction of the pat -
tern. This occurs through the formation 
of a dense F-actin network in the aligned 
filopodium that might enable a very effi-
cient cytoskeletal-substrate coupling. In 
non-aligned filopodia, less efficient cyto-
skeletal-substrate coupling might lead to 
filopodia retraction when the retrograde 
only orient neurite outgrowth but also lead 
to increase in neuronal process length,5,6 
robust axonal specification7 or differentia -
tion of stem cells to the neuronal lineage.8-10 
The ability of the cell to polarize (e.g., to 
directionally extend neurites) seems there-
fore to be intimately linked with robust 
neurite extension, and this might in turn 
allow regulation of cell fate.
In our recently published paper, 5 we 
identify a potential mechanism by which 
neuronal growth cones are able to inter-
prete such topographic cues to orient neu-
rite outgrowth in a model ridge/groove 
nanopatterned ECM laminin substrate 
(refered to as the line substrate through-
out this article). We also provide insight 
into how directionality is linked to robust 
neuronal process extension. We find that 
the line substrate leads to a switch in cell 
morphology, with a drastic decrease in the 
number and length of filopodia, and the 
formation of streamlined growth cones 
that contrast with the flat veil-like growth 
cones typically observed on classic 2D 
Figure 1. mo del of neurite guidance in response to nanotopographical cues. (A) Plain substrate. un restricted access to eCm  leads to a large amount of 
long filopodia, none of which can be stabilized by a robust F‐actin cytoskeleton. 
th
is is accompanied with a high frequency of neurite collapse events. 
(B) Line substrate, unaligned growth cone. Filopodia scan the line substrate through lateral scanning and protrusion/retraction
events. Only few filopodia align on the lines and thus almost all filopodia sense only discrete adhesion points to the 
eCm. (
C) Line substrate, aligned 
growth cone. 
th
rough stochastic sensing, multiple filopodia have aligned on the line substrate and have assembled an F‐actin rich cytoskeleton that 
stabilizes them. On the distal part of the growth cone, non‐aligned, unstable filopodia continue to operate, suggesting a crosstalk
between both filopodia populations. 
th
is stabilizes the growth cone leading to steady neurite outgrowth. Figure reproduced with permission from 5.

438 C ommunicative & Integrative Biology  V olume 4 Issue 4
cone guidance. Importantly, in a 2D 
environment, in which every filopodium 
engages identical amount of ECM, its 
stabilization cannot occur. This suggests 
that on the line substrate, the growth cone 
senses the local asymmetry of the ECM 
by globally integrating signals emanating 
from aligned and non-aligned filopodia 
which display different extents of adhe-
sion with the substrate. These signals 
must then be integrated to locally switch 
on the robust F-actin network that allows 
filopodium stabilization and, ultimately, 
robust directional neurite outgrowth. To 
understand this system, we must therefore 
identify the players that allow directional 
sensing by integrins and the logic of this 
signal integration machinery. At the same 
time, we must also gain insight in the sig-
naling events that allow the formation of 
the robust actin network that stabilizes 
aligned filopodia. An important feature of 
our experimental model system is that its 
filopodia morphodynamics are exquisitely 
robust and stereotypic compared to the 
2D environment. Furthermore, because 
the streamlined growth cone displays a 
as an isotropic environment by growth 
cone filopodia. In this case, orientation of 
neurite outgrowth on the permissive sub-
strate might be the result of mechanically 
sensing the rigidity of the environment by 
evaluating the differential traction forces 
exerted by integrins on the permissive 
or non-permissive substrate, rather than 
local changes in adhesive contact as on a 
nanometer-sized line substrate. Not sur-
prisingly, this has been shown to require 
myosin activity.13 In contrast, we find 
that myosin and Rho kinase activities are 
dispensible for neurite orientation on the 
nanometer-sized line substrate, suggesting 
that integrin molecules might not work as 
mechanosensors, but maybe simply evalu-
ate differences in the extent of adhesive 
contact. These lines of evidence point to 
the existence of highly diverse modes of 
ECM sensing that depend on the geom-
etry and size features of the ECM that the 
growth cone encounters.
It will be important to clarify the 
modality by which filopodia relay signals 
to the cytoskeleton to orient neurite out-
growth in this specific mode of growth 
has similar size features than the line sub -
strate and might therefore sense different 
extent of adhesion depending on if it is 
aligned or not with the asymmetric line 
nanostructure. Given the large literature 
about filopodium cytoskeletal dynamics 
and growth cone guidance, an important 
question that comes to mind is why this 
striking behavior was not observed before. 
The simple answer is that, on classic 2D 
substrates, the isotropic nature of the ECM 
surrounding filopodia does not allow 
them to sense local differences in adhesive 
contact. Because each filopodia engage an 
identical amount of ECM, this does not 
allow to trigger the signal amplification 
mechanisms that allow filopodium sta-
bilization and steady neurite outgrowth. 
This also applies to stripe assays that are 
commonly used as an experimental para-
digm for directional neurite outgrowth 
in the neurobiology community. Such 
stripe assays typically consist of alternat-
ing zones of non-permissive (e.g., poly-
D-ornithine) and permissive substrates 
(e.g., laminin) with size features of tens 
of microns,13 that are locally experienced 
Figure 2. Comparison of growth cone dynamics on the line substrate and in a developing retina. (A) Growth cone dynamics of n1e- 115 neuron-like 
cells on the line substrate. 
n1e-
115 were transfected with GFP-lifeact, an F-actin marker. 
re
d and blue lines indicates the lateral movement of non-
aligned filopodia. 
no
te the high F-actin content in aligned filopodia. 
ti
mescale is in minutes:seconds. Part reproduced with permission from reference 
5. (B) Growth cone dynamics of Xenopus retinal axons imaged live in the developping retina. 
no
te streamlined appearance of growth cone and left-
right lateral movement of lateral filopodia (indicated by arrows). Part reproduced with permission from. 12 Scale bars = 10 mm.

www.landesbioscience.com C ommunicative & Integrative Biology  439
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by grants from 
the Swiss National Science Foundation 
and Human Frontiers Science Program to 
Olivier Pertz.
References
1. T siper MV, Yurchenco PD. Laminin assembles into 
separate basement membrane and fibrillar matrices 
in Schwann cells. J Cell Sci 2002; 115:1005-15.
2.
 I
ngber DE. Mechanical control of tissue morpho -
genesis during embryological development. Int J Dev 
Biol 2006; 50:255-66.
3.
 K
hademhosseini A, Langer R, Borenstein J, Vacanti 
JP. Microscale technologies for tissue engineering and 
biology. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2006; 103:2480-7.
4. S
niadecki NJ, Desai RA, Ruiz SA, Chen CS. 
Nanotechnology for cell-substrate interactions. Ann 
Biomed Eng 2006; 34:59-74.
5.
 J
ang KJ, Kim MS, Feltrin D, Jeon NL, Suh KY, Pertz 
O. Two distinct filopodia populations at the growth 
cone allow to sense nanotopographical extracellular 
matrix cues to guide neurite outgrowth. PLoS One 
2010 ; 5:15966.
6.
 P
atel S, Kurpinski K, Quigley R, Gao H, Hsiao BS, 
Poo MM, et al. Bioactive nanofibers: synergistic 
effects of nanotopography and chemical signaling on 
cell guidance. Nano Lett 2007; 7:2122-8.
7.
 C
ho WK, Kang K, Kang G, Jang MJ, Nam Y, 
Choi IS. Pitch-dependent acceleration of neurite out -
growth on nanostructured anodized aluminum oxide 
substrates. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl 2010.
8.
 L
ee MR, Kwon KW, Jung H, Kim HN, Suh KY, Kim 
K, et al. Direct differentiation of human embryonic 
stem cells into selective neurons on nanoscale ridge/
groove pattern arrays. Biomaterials 2010; 31:4360-6.
9.
 X
ie J, Willerth SM, Li X, Macewan MR, Rader A, 
Sakiyama-Elbert SE, et al. The differentiation of 
embryonic stem cells seeded on electrospun nanofibers 
into neural lineages. Biomaterials 2009; 30:354-62.
10.
 Y
im EK, Pang SW, Leong KW. Synthetic nanostruc -
tures inducing differentiation of human mesenchy -
mal stem cells into neuronal lineage. Exp Cell Res 
2007; 313:1820-9.
11.
 M
allavarapu A, Mitchison T. Regulated actin cytoskel-
eton assembly at filopodium tips controls their exten -
sion and retraction. J Cell Biol 1999; 146:1097-106.
12.
 H
arris WA, Holt CE, Bonhoeffer F. Retinal axons 
with and without their somata, growing to and 
arborizing in the tectum of Xenopus embryos: 
a time-lapse video study of single fibres in vivo. 
Development 1987; 101:123-33.
13.
 T
urney SG, Bridgman PC. Laminin stimulates and 
guides axonal outgrowth via growth cone myosin II 
activity. Nat Neurosci 2005; 8:717-9.
14.
 P
ertz OC, Wang Y, Yang F, Wang W, Gay LJ, 
Gristenko MA, et al. Spatial mapping of the neurite 
and soma proteomes reveals a functional Cdc42/Rac 
regulatory network. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2008; 
105:1931-6.
15.
 P
ertz O. Spatio-temporal Rho GTPase signaling—
where are we now? J Cell Sci 2010; 123:1841-50.
16.
 S
abouri-Ghomi M, Wu Y, Hahn K, Danuser G. 
Visualizing and quantifying adhesive signals. Curr 
Opin Cell Biol 2008; 20:541-50.
17.
 M
ammoto A, Ingber DE. Cytoskeletal control of 
growth and cell fate switching. Curr Opin Cell Biol 
2009; 21:864-70.
18.
 V
ogel V, Sheetz MP. Cell fate regulation by coupling 
mechanical cycles to biochemical signaling pathways. 
Curr Opin Cell Biol 2009; 21:38-46.
19.
 M
arkus A, Patel TD, Snider WD. Neurotrophic fac -
tors and axonal growth. Curr Opin Neurobiol 2002; 
12:523-31.
the classically studied extrinsic cues such as 
specific soluble growth factors and ECM 
components.17,18 Such cell intrinsic sig -
nals are produced by mechanical cycles of 
extension and retraction that allow cells to 
sense their environment, initiate intracellu-
lar signaling events that can ultimately be 
integrated to produce long term responses 
such as transcriptional regulation and cell 
fate specification.18 Obviously, the different 
morphodynamic cell behaviors observed 
on the 2D (neurite growth/retraction 
cycles) and the nanopattern (steady neurite 
outgrowth) immediatly suggest that there 
will be production of distinct cell-intrinsic, 
mechano-chemical signals in both modes 
of neurite outgrowth. How could such 
morphodynamic behaviors be integrated 
in a global cellular response? One pos-
sibility is that during neurite retraction, 
in which the growth cone de-adheres, the 
integrin signaling that normally occurs in 
the adherent growth cone during neurite 
protrusion is simply turned off because 
of a lack of integrin engagement with the 
ECM. There are numerous examples of 
retrograde signaling mechanisms between 
the growth cone and the nucleus,19 and one 
might easily imagine that such processes 
are depending on integrin signaling in the 
growth cone (e.g., that the growth cone is 
in its adhesive state). Continuous integrin 
engagement during processive neurite out-
growth on the nanopattern might therefore 
ensure constant retrograde signaling from 
the growth cone to the nucleus, and allow 
robust cell specification or other cellular 
responses such as cell survival and quies-
cence. At a different spatial and temporal 
scale, the unstable versus stable filopodia 
behaviors on the 2D versus the nanopat-
tern could also lead to production of simi-
lar cell-intrinsic mechano-chemical signals.
To conclude, we believe that the 
nanopattern technology presented here, 
combined with a variety of contemporary 
cell biology techniques such as live cell 
imaging and large scale perturbation stud-
ies has the potential to provide an integrated 
view of the spatio-temporal signaling net-
works that regulate a prototypical growth 
cone guidance process. Additionally, this 
model system also opens up the possibility 
to study how these spatio-temporal signal-
ing networks are globally integrated by the 
cell to regulate cell fate.
reduced number of filopodia, this allows to 
easily observe each phases of their cycles of 
growth/retraction, lateral scanning motion 
and stabilization (Fig. 2A and B ). This is 
not the case on the 2D substrate in which 
the high filopodia density leads them to lat-
erally bump into each other, restricts their 
movement, and thus precludes the observa-
tion of these events (Fig. 2C). The robust-
ness of this system should therefore allow to 
unambigously quantify each dynamic stage 
of the filopodium life cycle such as growth 
and retraction, left-right lateral movement 
and stabilization through assembly of a 
robust F-actin network. This should allow 
to decipher the signaling networks that 
regulate each filopodium behavior using 
genetic perturbations and visualization 
of spatio-temporal signaling events using 
fluorescent biosensors. Since the neurite 
proteome of our N1E-115 neuronal-like 
cell system has been elucidated,14 we have 
a catalogue of components as a template 
that can be tested by RNA interference 
screens. A complementary technique will 
be to visualize the fine dynamics of signal-
ing proteins such as Rho GTPases, which 
are essential regulators of the cytoskeleton, 
and have previously shown to occur on 
spatial and temporal scales of micrometer 
and tens of seconds.15 We therefore envision 
that dynamic activation patterns of Rho 
GTPase signaling will correlate with dif-
ferent morphogenetic phases of filopodium 
movement. Finally, computer vision tech-
niques are also available to merge dynam -
ics datasets from different experiments in 
one universal model.16 This could then be 
ultimately used for modeling the whole 
process.
Beyond its capacity to allow efficient 
directional neurite outgrowth, the line 
substrate mentioned in this study has 
also been shown to induce robust differ-
entiation of human embryonic stem cells 
to the neuronal lineage without the use 
of differentiation-inducing agents such as 
cocktails of growth factors.8 Furthermore, 
differentiation is not efficient on classic 2D 
substrates that use the same ECM protein, 
suggesting that ECM nanotopology plays 
an important role. How can this occur? 
The important parameters here might 
be cell intrinsic, mechanical cues, which 
have been recently proposed to be equally 
important in stem cell fate regulation than 